 United Nations A/RES/63/116 
General Assembly Distr.: General  26 February 2009 
 
Sixty-third session 
Agenda item 64 
 
Resolution adopted by the General Assembly 
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/63/L.54)] 
63/116. Sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights 
 
 
 The General Assembly 
 Adopts the following Declaration: 
 
 
  Declaration on the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights 
 
 
 We, the States Members of the United Nations, celebrate today the sixtieth 
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which is 
a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations in the field of 
human rights. Since its adoption, it has inspired the world and empowered women 
and men around the globe to assert their inherent dignity and rights without 
discrimination on any grounds. It is and will remain a source of progressive 
development of all human rights. 
 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights calls upon us to recognize and 
respect the dignity, freedom and equality of all human beings. We applaud the 
efforts undertaken by States to promote and protect all human rights for all. We 
must strive to enhance international cooperation and the dialogue among peoples 
and nations on the basis of mutual respect and understanding towards this goal.  
 In an ever-changing world, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
remains a relevant ethical compass that guides us in addressing the challenges we 
face today. The living, driving force of all human rights unites us in our common 
goal to eradicate the manifold ills that plague our world. We remain committed to 
development and to the internationally agreed development goals, and are convinced 
that their fulfillment will be instrumental to the enjoyment of human rights. 
 We deplore that human rights and fundamental freedoms are not yet fully and 
universally respected in all parts of the world. In no country or territory can it be 
claimed that all human rights have been fully realized at all times for all. Human 
beings continue to suffer from the neglect and violation of their human rights and 
fundamental freedoms. We laud the courage and commitment of all women and men 
around the world who have devoted their lives to promoting and protecting human 
rights.  
08-47775 
A/RES/63/116 
 We all have the duty to step up our efforts to promote and protect all human 
rights and to prevent, stop and redress all human rights violations. We must give 
everybody a chance to learn about and better understand all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms. We must continue to strengthen the human rights pillar of 
the United Nations, as we undertook with the creation of the Human Rights Council.  
 Today, we, the States Members of the United Nations, reiterate that we will not 
shy away from the magnitude of this challenge. We reaffirm our commitment 
towards the full realization of all human rights for all, which are universal, 
indivisible, interrelated, interdependent and mutually reinforcing.  
 
65th plenary meeting 
10 December 2008 
2 
