United Nations A/RES/63/25
General Assembly Distr.: General 3 December 2008
Sixty-third session
Agenda item 64
Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/63/L.31)]
63/25.  Commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes, principles and provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, which include the promotion of, and respect for, human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all,
Recalling its resolution 62/171 of 18 December 2007 entitled “International
Year of Human Rights Learning”, in which it decided to commemorate the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1 at a plenary meeting to
be held on 10 December 2008,
Recalling also its resolution 2217 A (XXI) of 19 December 1966, in which it
decided to award at five-year intervals the United Nations award for outstanding
achievements in the field of human rights,
1.  Reaffirms its decision to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights1 on 10 December 2008;
2.  Decides that the commemorative event will comprise a plenary meeting,
including the award ceremony for the United Nations prize in the field of human
rights, and two consecutive informal interactive panel discussions;
3.  Encourages all Member States and observers to participate at the highest
level possible;
4.  Decides that the President of the General Assembly, the President of the
Human Rights Council, the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights will address the commemorative plenary meeting;
5.  Invites intergovernmental organizations and entities that have observer
status with the General Assembly, relevant entities of the United Nations system and
non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council to be represented at the commemorative event;
_______________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
08-47229
A/RES/63/25
6.  Requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with
Member States and with the technical support of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, to draw up, no later than 30 November
2008, a list of two representatives of pertinent non-governmental organizations for
each of the informal interactive panel discussions who will speak on behalf of civil
society, and to circulate the list to Member States to be considered on a no-objection
basis;
7.  Also requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with
Member States and with the technical support of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, to finalize the organizational arrangements
for the commemorative event, including the identification of themes and the
assignment of panellists for the informal interactive panel discussions;
8.  Further requests the President of the General Assembly to hold open
consultations with Member States and observers in order to prepare a brief
declaration reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
commitment for its full implementation, to be adopted by consensus at the
commemorative plenary meeting.
57th plenary meeting
24 November 2008
2
