E
SCT/24/4
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH
DATE: AUGUST, 31 2010
Standing Committee on the Law of Trademarks, Industrial
Designs and Geographical Indications
Twenty-Fourth Session
Geneva, November 1 to 4, 2010
TRADEMARKS AND THE INTERNET
Document prepared by the Secretariat
I.  INTRODUCTION
1.  At its twenty-third session, held in Geneva from June 30 to July 2, 2010, the Standing
Committee on the Law of Trademarks, Industrial Designs and Geographical
Indications (SCT) requested the Secretariat to prepare a background document
summarizing past and current developments in the area of Trademarks and the Internet,
in particular the WIPO Joint Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the Protection of
Marks, and Other Industrial Property Rights in Signs, on the Internet, and recent
developments within the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)
on domain name issues.
SCT members and observers were invited to present their
contribution to that work to the Secretariat by September 15, 2010
(see document SCT/23/6, paragraph 18).
2.  In accordance with the request made by the SCT, the Secretariat has prepared the
present document, which attempts to summarize existing information on the above issues
and presents a number of additional considerations for discussion by the Standing
Committee.
SCT/24/4
page 2
II.  INTERNET DOMAIN NAMES
3.  During recent years, the Internet has gained increasing importance for the global
movement of goods and services of all kinds.
With continued growth at a phenomenal
rate, the Internet is now a major global data pipeline, which is more and more used in the
mainstream of commerce to sell and deliver goods and services across transnational
borders.  Issues of intellectual property protection regarding the material available on the
Internet are just as important as issues regarding the use of trademarks as vectors of
consumer preference in a global marketplace.
4.  One of the earliest issues addressed in that context was the bad faith registration of
trademarks as domain names.
It is well-known that an important break-through in
tackling this issue was reached through the first WIPO Internet Domain Name Process,
as a result of which ICANN adopted the Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution
Policy (UDRP).
In addition to being the principal global administrator of cases under
the UDRP, the WIPO Arbitration and Mediation Center continues to be active in
monitoring and following up on ICANN’s activities as relevant to identity protection on the
Internet.  This concerns, in particular, ICANN’s proposals for significant expansion of the
generic domain name space, as explained in further detail in Annex III to this document.
III.  THE WIPO JOINT RECOMMENDATION CONCERNING PROVISIONS ON THE
PROTECTION OF MARKS, AND OTHER INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY RIGHTS IN
SIGNS, ON THE INTERNET
5.  Apart from the work on domain names, the SCT was instrumental in preparing the WIPO
“Joint Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Marks, and Other
Industrial Property Rights in Signs, on the Internet (hereinafter “Joint Recommendation”),
which was adopted during the thirty-six series of meetings of the Assemblies of the
Member States of WIPO (September 24 to October 3, 2001).
The Joint
Recommendation is the third of a series of instruments in the area of trademark law
adopted by the Assemblies of the Paris Union and the WIPO General Assembly.
6.  The provisions contained in the Joint Recommendation aim at facilitating the application
of territorial laws regarding trademarks and other industrial property rights in signs and
territorial laws regarding unfair competition, to the use of signs on the Internet.
The
provisions are intended to be applied in determining whether, under the applicable law,
use of a sign on the Internet has contributed to the acquisition, maintenance or
infringement of a mark or another industrial property right in the sign, or whether such use
constitutes an act of unfair competition.
7.  Under the provisions, the use of a sign on the Internet is treated as the use in a member
State, only if the use has a commercial effect in that particular member State.
The Joint
Recommendation details the factors for determining whether the sign has a commercial
effect.  Although the list of potentially relevant factors is non-exhaustive, it is intended to
assist the competent authority to make a finding of commercial effect.
The competent
authority is, however, free to determine which factors are relevant in a given case.
SCT/24/4
page 3
8.  With respect to the liability of the user of a sign on the Internet in a way that has a
commercial effect in a member State, the Joint Recommendation provides that if such a
user owns a right in the sign in another member State, or uses the sign with the consent
of the owner of such a right, or is permitted to use the sign, he or she will not be liable to
the trademark owner in that other State prior to receiving a “notification of infringement”.
This notice and avoidance of conflict procedure is an attempt to balance the interests of
good faith legitimate users on the one hand and owners of rights which might be infringed
by such use on the other.
9.  The Joint Recommendation contains provisions that instruct the competent authority
granting a remedy against the use of a sign on the Internet in a member State to consider
the effect of a potential injunction in other States.
Any remedy must be proportionate to
the commercial effect of the use in that member State.
The competent authority should
avoid imposing a remedy that would have the effect of prohibiting any future use of the
sign on the Internet.
The full text of the Joint Recommendation and Explanatory Notes
are contained in Annex II to this document.
IV.  RECENT DEVELOPMENTS REGARDING TRADEMARKS AND THE INTERNET
10.  Almost ten years after the adoption of the Joint Recommendation, the Internet has
provided countless new ways for ingenious businesses and individuals to refer to
trademarks in a manner that impacts the trademark holder’s business.
These new
methods may not directly associate the mark with goods or services that the user is
offering for sale and may even be hidden from the consumer’s view.
Practices such as
the unauthorized use of trademarks as keywords by search engine operators or within
listings for non-genuine goods on auction sites, or the use of trademarks on virtual
objects that are traded in virtual worlds, constitute clear challenges to the traditional
application of trademark law.
11.  Recently, a significant number of cases have been brought before national and regional
courts.  In deciding those cases, courts have resorted to Trademark Law principles often
in combination with other statutory law regulating electronic commerce or the
enforcement of intellectual property rights.
The solutions provided differ from one
jurisdiction to another.
Annex I to this document contains a succinct summary of new
challenges regarding the use of trademarks on the Internet, as shown in a selective
sample of cases across different jurisdictions.
12.  The SCT is invited to
(i) take note of the contents of
Annex I to this document;
(ii) review the 2001 Joint
Recommendation contained in Annex II to this
document with a view to determining whether
amendments are desirable and appropriate to
address the recent developments set out in
Annex I;
SCT/24/4
page 4
(iii) identify any other course of action that
might be perceived as useful and appropriate
to address specific trademark issues related
to the use of trademarks on the Internet;
(iv) note the contents of Annex III to this
document and consider possible follow-up, if
any.
[Annexes follow]
SCT/24/4
ANNEX I
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS REGARDING TRADEMARKS AND THE INTERNET
I.  Liability of Internet Auction Sites for Trademark Infringement
1.  The commercial significance of online auction sites continues to escalate, as
retailers capitalize on the opportunity to access a vast consumer base, at low cost.
At the outset, it is important to note that such sites typically facilitate both
professional and amateur retailers.
Moreover, depending on the scruples of the
seller, a brand name may be exploited unlawfully to attract buyers to non-genuine
goods.  This dynamic raises significant challenges for trademark owners;
challenges, which are intensified by the global nature of the internet and
jurisdictional divergences in trademark law.
2.  In recent years, litigation in this area has increased strongly, as lawsuits have
been taken against large auction sites in multiple jurisdictions.
Notwithstanding
distinct analogies of fact and legal argument presented in these cases, the judicial
outcomes have diverged in different jurisdictions.
Variations in domestic law
contribute to this divergence, but broader considerations of policy also bear
influence on courts.
In any event, legal uncertainty currently exists for both
auction sites and brand owners.
As a result, the practices and procedures of
auction sites, and the enforcement strategies of brand owners must be tailored
according to jurisdiction.
Policy
3.  Before examining the relevant case law, it is helpful to outline the broad issues of
policy, which are implicated when a brand owner challenges the conduct of an
auction site.
Unquestionably, the most important issue in this respect is which
party should carry the burden of policing the use of trademarks on the site.
One
argument is that brand owners should bear this burden, because they have
intimate knowledge of their authorized goods and thus are best suited to detect a
trademark violation.
Furthermore, it is argued that intellectual property holders
should enforce their own rights, rather than rely on another party to do it for them.
On the other hand, it is claimed that auction sites should bear the burden because
they alone have the ability to filter ads, take remedial actions against sellers and
ultimately prevent trademark infringements from occurring on their sites.
This
argument is bolstered by the fact that auction sites profit from all sales conducted
on the site, including sales of illegitimate goods.
Auction sites resist the burden
however, because it threatens to jeopardize their business model.
Meanwhile,
brand owners claim with equal force that they sustain huge revenue losses due to
the manner in which auction sites currently operate.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 2
4.  Another policy debate centers on passivity.
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) are
typically not liable for illegal activity conducted online, on the basis that they are a
“mere conduit1”.
In a similar vein, auction sites seek exemption from liability for
trademark violations on the basis that they are merely providing a forum for a
transaction between a buyer and a seller.
In other words, because the website is
hosting and is “passive”, rather than actively verifying the claims of sellers, liability
for trademark infringement is improper.
Brand owners dispute this claim of
passivity however, and refer to such examples as the endorsement and support
services that auction sites offer to those sellers that reach a high volume of
transactions.
As discussed below, the manner and extent to which an auction site
interacts with sellers and with brand owners is an important consideration for
courts when determining an auction site’s liability.
Cases
United States of America
5.  In the United States of America, the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
recently delivered a seminal judgment in the case of Tiffany v Ebay2.
Regarding
the sale of non-genuine jewelry on the site, Tiffany brought suit against Ebay for
direct and contributory trademark infringement, trademark dilution and false
advertising.
6.  The Court rejected the claim of direct infringement on the basis that eBay used the
mark to describe accurately the genuine Tiffany goods offered for sale on the site3.
Also, the use did not suggest that Tiffany was affiliated with eBay or that Tiffany
endorsed the sales4.
For the purposes of assessing direct infringement, the Court
held that eBay’s alleged knowledge of the availability of counterfeit wares on the
site was not a basis of such a claim and to impose liability on such grounds would
unduly inhibit the lawful resale of genuine Tiffany goods5.
7.  Regarding the claim of contributory infringement, the Court acknowledged that it
was a more difficult issue than direct infringement6.
An auction site may be liable if
it “continues to supply its service to one whom it knows or has reason to know is
engaging in trademark infringement7”.
However, concerning the requisite degree
of knowledge, the Court ruled that “for contributory trademark infringement to lie, a
1 For example, pursuant to Articles 12 and 13 of the Directive on certain legal aspects of electronic
commerce in the Internal Market 2000/31/EC (E-Commerce Directive), an ISP is exempt from liability
when it serves as a mere conduit or provides temporary caching for the sole purpose of making the
transmission of content more efficient, is of a mere technical, automatic or passive nature, and where the
ISP has neither knowledge nor control over the content being transmitted or stored.
2 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 98 (2010).
3 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 103 (2010).
Regarding genuine goods, the Court acknowledged that “a
significant portion of the ‘Tiffany’ sterling silver jewelry listed on the eBay website was counterfeit” but
found that a substantial number of authentic Tiffany goods are also sold on eBay.”
Id. at 98.
4 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 103 (2010).
5 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 103 (2010).
6 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 103 (2010).
7 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 106 (2010).
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 3
service provider must have more than a general knowledge or reason to know that
its service is being used to sell counterfeit goods.
Some contemporary knowledge
of which particular listings are infringing or will infringe in the future is necessary8”.
Because eBay, upon acquiring specific knowledge of infringements, removed
those listings and suspended repeat offenders, eBay had not failed to uphold this
legal standard.
Accordingly, eBay was not liable for contributory trademark
infringement9.
Interestingly however, the Court prohibited eBay from “willful
blindness10”.
Thus, if eBay has reason to suspect that users of its services are
infringing a protected mark, it is not permitted to “look the other way” in an effort to
shield itself from liability.
In other words, willful blindness is equivalent to actual
knowledge11.
8.  As to the final two claims, the dilution argument failed because eBay never used
the mark to refer to its own product12 and the false advertising claim was
remanded to the District Court13.
United Kingdom
9.  In the UK, L’Oréal brought suit against eBay14 claiming, inter alia, that eBay had
committed trademark violations based on theories of joint liability and primary
liability.  Regarding joint liability, the Court declared that this was a matter to be
determined by national law.
The judge acknowledged that eBay “do facilitate the
infringement of third parties’ trademarks, including L’Oréal’s trademarks, by
sellers; they do know that such infringements have occurred and are likely to
continue to occur; and they profit from such infringements except where the rights
owner makes a VeRO15 complaint in sufficient time16”.
However, L’Oreal failed to
establish that eBay had procured sellers’ particular acts of infringement and had
not proved evidence of common design.
The Court ruled (i) eBay is under no legal
duty to prevent infringement, and (ii) facilitation with knowledge and intention to
profit is not enough17.
8 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 107 (2010).
9 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 109 (2010).
10 See Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d. 93, 109 and 110.
11 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 110 (2010).
12 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 112 (2010).
13 Tiffany v eBay, 600 F.3d.
93, 114 (2010).
14 L’Oreal SA v eBay International AG, [2009] E.T.M.R.
53.
15 eBay's Verified Rights Owner or VeRO programme is a notice and take-down system that is intended to
provide intellectual property owners with assistance in removing infringing listings from the Site.
L’Oreal
SA v eBay International AG, [2009] E.T.M.R. 53, at 875.
16 L’Oreal SA v eBay International AG, [2009] E.T.M.R. 53, at 928.
17 L’Oreal SA v eBay International AG, [2009] E.T.M.R. 53, at 928.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 4
10.  With respect to primary liability, L’Oréal targeted eBay’s use of L’Oreal trademarks
in sponsored links on search engine sites18.
Additionally, L’Oreal challenged use
of the marks on the eBay site as subcategories to assist in a search of eBay
listings19.  It is important to note that both claims relate only to trademark infringing
products.  On these issues, the judge decided to refer questions to the European
Court of Justice for clarification20.
The answers to these questions are pending.
France
11.  In France, different courts have reached different conclusions as to eBay’s liability
for the sale of non-genuine goods.
In LVM v eBay21, the Commercial Court of
Paris found in favor of Louis Vuitton and held that eBay was guilty of “serious
tortuous acts consisting in abstention and negligence22”.
The Court rejected the
notion that eBay was a mere host and instead classified eBay as a broker.
In this
role, eBay had failed in its duty to prevent illicit sales. eBay had “failed to set up
effective and appropriate measures to combat trademark infringement” and the
“anti-counterfeit measures [were] inadequate because eBay did not require sellers
to authenticate their merchandise nor did eBay permanently terminate infringing
seller accounts23”.
12.  By contrast, a more recent French decision24, resulting from litigation initiated by
L’Oréal, has ruled in favor of eBay.
According to the Court, eBay had fulfilled its
obligation in good faith and had done its due diligence to prevent infringing goods
being sold through its site25.
In order to ground liability, the case would require
evidenced knowledge on the part of eBay of infringing content and a failure to
remedy it26.
Belgium
13.  In Lancôme Parfums v eBay27, the Brussels Commercial Court found that eBay
was not liable because it “did not have actual knowledge of illegal information it
hosted, or it was not aware of any facts or circumstances suggesting such illegal
18 L’Oreal SA v eBay International AG, [2009] E.T.M.R. 53, at 929.
19 L’Oreal SA v eBay International AG, [2009] E.T.M.R. 53, at 860.
20 See C 267/40, 7.11.2009, Available at
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=OJ:C:2009:267:0040:0041:en:pdf.
21 Commercial Court of Paris, RG no 2006077799.
22 Rebecca M.
Haynes, Should Designers Pay the Price?
A Look at Contributory Trademark Infringement as
it Relates to Different Outcomes of Internet Auction Site Liability in the United States and France, 8 Ave.
Maria L.  Rev. 223, at 232.
23 Allison N.
Ziegler, Online Auction House Liability for the Sale of Trademark Infringing Products, 14 Marq.
Intell.  Prop.  L.  Rev. 215, at 230.
24 Case RG 07/11365 L’Oréal SA v eBay France SA, 13 May 2009.
25 Nathan Fan, L’Oreal v eBay: European Courts Rule eBay Not Liable for Sales of Counterfeit Goods, May
26, 2009, http://www.iposgoode.ca/2009/05/l%E2%80%99oreal-v-ebay-european-courts-rule-ebay-not-
liable/
26 Franck Soutoul and Jean-Phillippe Bresson, eBay Succeeds Over L’Oreal in France, Trademark World
#219, July/August 2009 15, at 16.
27 Case A/07/06032.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 5
nature, and upon obtaining such knowledge or awareness, it had acted promptly to
remove the information or render it inaccessible28”.
Therefore, eBay was
successful in asserting that it was a mere host for the information shown and
enjoyed the exemptions conferred by articles 12 to 15 of the E-Commerce
Directive29.
Germany
14.  A number of German courts have pronounced on the issue of auction site liability
for trademark infringement30.
The position has been characterized as follows: If a
seller31 is acting on a commercial footing and the auction site has been provided
clear information of infringement, then the site may be secondarily liable as an
“interferer” if it fails to prevent infringements by filtering and manual checks32.
It
appears that the courts have attempted to strike a balance when allocating the
burden of monitoring for trademark infringement.
Because judges have shown a
willingness to protect the business model of the auction sites, there is only an
obligation to control only easily identifiable infringements33.
II.  Liability of Search Engines for the Sale of Trademarks as Keywords
15.  When Internet users conduct an online search, they are typically exposed to two
different sets of results: “natural results34” and “sponsored links35”.
Natural results
are generated by the search engine in a neutral manner based on relevance to the
search terms36.
Initially, search engines relied heavily on “meta tags37” to produce
natural results, however, the importance of meta tags has been reduced by
28 Kevin K.H.
Pun, Comparative Study on the Liability for Trade Mark Infringement of Online Auction
Providers, E.I.P.R. 2009, 31(11) 559-567, at 561.
29  Ibid.
30 For a list of the judgments, see Mary Bagnall, David Fyfield, Constantine Rehag, Michael Adams, Liability
of Online Auctioneers: Auction Sites and Brand Owners Hammer it Out, INTA Bulletin Vol.
65 No.  1
(January 1, 2010), at 6.
31 This refers to the actual seller of the infringing goods.
In other words, the party that is directly liable for
trademark infringement.
32 See Kevin K.H.
Pun, Comparative Study on the Liability for Trade Mark Infringement of Online Auction
Providers, E.I.P.R. 2009, 31(11) 559-567, at 563, and Mary Bagnall, David Fyfield, Constantine Rehag,
Michael Adams, Liability of Online Auctioneers: Auction Sites and Brand Owners Hammer it Out, INTA
Bulletin Vol.
65 No.  1 (January 1, 2010).
33 Mary Bagnall, David Fyfield, Constantine Rehag, Michael Adams, Liability of Online Auctioneers: Auction
Sites and Brand Owners Hammer it Out, INTA Bulletin Vol.
65 No.  1 (January 1, 2010).
34 Also referred to as organic results or non-sponsored results.
35 See Rachel R.
Friedman, No Confusion Here: Proposing a New Paradigm for the Litigation of Keyword
Advertising Trademark Infringement Cases, 12 Vand.
J.  Ent.  & Tech.  L. 355, at 363 (2010).
36 See Die BergSpechte Outdoor Reisen une Alpineschule Edi Koblmüller v Günter Guni, Case C-278/08,
par 5.
37 “A meta tag” is a list of words normally hidden in a Web site that acts as an index or reference source
identifying the content of the Web site for search engines.”
Thomas McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks
and Unfair Competition §25:69 (4th Ed.).
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 6
modern search algorithms38.
In contrast to natural results, sponsored links appear
because certain websites (“advertisers”) pay fees to the search engine to ensure
that their links appear following the input of certain search terms (“keywords”).
16.  Taking Google as an example, advertisers bid on certain keywords and are
charged fees on a “pay per click” basis.
In other words, each time a user clicks on
a sponsored link, the advertiser is charged a fee by Google.
This fee is
determined by auction, meaning the advertiser or advertisers who have agreed to
pay the most “per click” will appear in a prime location on the results page.
Thus,
the fee varies according to the popularity of the search term in question.
17.  Often, brand owners that appear as the first link in the list of natural results, also
bid for a sponsored link to ensure that consumers searching specifically for their
brand arrive at their website.
However, complications arise when one advertiser
bids on a keyword, which constitutes the trademark of a third party.
In this
situation, a consumer searching for a particular brand may be exposed to a
sponsored link from that brand’s competitor.
This may cause consumer confusion
or lead the consumer to believe that the two brands are affiliated.
Naturally, this is
problematic from the perspective of the trademark owner.
Redress, however, is
fraught with difficult questions of trademark law, such as what constitutes an
infringing use, and, if the activity is infringing, who should be held liable; the search
engine, the advertiser, or both39?
18.  Recently, Google has been a defendant in numerous cases, in multiple
jurisdictions, because of its “Adwords”40 program.
Adwords allows an advertiser to
bid on the trademarks of another party as keywords.
The purchasers of these
keywords may be competitors of the brand owner or they may be offering non-
genuine goods.
In either instance, the brand owner may be susceptible to harm,
both financial and reputational.
Cases
United States of America
19.  According to a recent case in the United States of America, two issues are critical
in a keyword advertising case: first, the plaintiff must establish that there has been
a “use in commerce”, second, the plaintiff must show that a “likelihood of
confusion” exists.
The Second Circuit recently handed down a landmark verdict in
the case of RescueCom v Google41, holding that Google’s sale of plaintiff’s
trademark as a keyword to competitors, which caused competitor’s advertisements
to appear on user’s screens whenever a user searched for the term “Rescuecom”,
38 Thomas McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition §25:69 (4th Ed.)
39 Jonathan Cornthwaite, Adwords or Bad Words?
A UK Perspective on Keywords and Trademark
Infringement, E.I.P.R. 2009, 31 (7), 347-352, at 347.
40 For more information on Adwords, see
http://adwords.google.com/support/aw/bin/answer.py?
hl=en&answer=6084
41 Rescuecom Corp. v Google Inc., 562 F.3d 123 (2d Cir.
2009).
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 7
was sufficient to constitute a “use in commerce”.
The Court remanded the case to
the U.S.  District Court to determine whether or not plaintiff could also establish the
second element, “likelihood of confusion”.
The outcome of the remand is pending.
European Court of Justice42
20.  The European Court of Justice (ECJ) recently handed down its ruling in response
to preliminary questions posed by the French Cour de Cassation.
The ECJ issued
a joint ruling, concerning three different cases, but for the purpose of this analysis,
the facts pertaining to the Louis Vuittion Malletier (LVM) lawsuit are suitably
illustrative.
When users entered LVM’s trademarks into Google, sponsored links
appeared offering imitation versions of LVM’s products.
This occurred because
advertisers (i.e. the customers of Google’s Adword program) had chosen
keywords that were identical or confusingly similar to LVM’s marks.
LVM sued
alleging, inter alia, that Google had infringed its trademarks.
LVM was successful
at both the trial court level and at the Court of Appeal.
When the case reached the
Cour de Cassation, that Court sought a preliminary ruling on a number of issues
from the ECJ.
21.  In analyzing the judgment of the ECJ, it is important to note that the Court ruled on
the liability of two distinct parties.
On the one hand, the Court’s ruling relates to
the liability of the internet referencing service provider (Google).
However, the
Court also discussed the liability of the advertiser (the customer of Google’s
Adwords program).
This distinction is important because the potential for
establishing trademark infringement differs for each.
22.  First, on the issue of “use” as it relates to Google’s liability, the Court held that “an
internet referencing service provider which stores, as a keyword, a sign identical
with a trademark and organizes the display of advertisements on the basis of that
keyword does not use (emphasis added) that sign within the meaning of the
Trademark Directive”.
23.  By contrast, the Court held that use by an advertiser of a sign identical with a
trademark as a keyword in the context of an internet referencing service falls within
the concept of use (emphasis added) “in relation to goods or services” within the
meaning of Article 5(1)(a) of the Trademark Directive43.
24.  Moving beyond the concept of use, the Court also examined whether Google
could avail itself of the safe harbor defence under Article 14 of the E-Commerce
Directive.  According to the Court, the availability of this defence hinges upon
whether Google has played an “active role” that would give it knowledge of, or
control over the data stored44”.
It is for the national court to determine whether the
internet service provider has behaved in a neutral manner or has been “active” in
42 Following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon on December 1, 2009, the European Court of Justice (ECJ)
has been renamed “The Court of Justice of the European Union”.
43 Google France SARL v Louis Vuitton Malletier SA (C-236/08, C-237/08 & C-238/08) [2010] paragraph 73.
44 Google France SARL v Louis Vuitton Malletier SA (C-236/08, C-237/08 & C-238/08) [2010]
paragraph 114.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 8
this sense45.
If such an active role has been played by the keyword operator, then
the defence will be unavailable.
However, even if the keyword operator has not
played an active role, it may still be liable (under the E-Commerce Directive) if it
failed to act expeditiously to remove or disable access to an offending ad after
obtaining knowledge of the unlawful nature of the ad.
25.  Turning again to the liability of the advertiser, the Court focused on the advertising
function of a trademark.
The trademark owner can prohibit the advertiser from
using the mark as a keyword for goods or services identical to those for which the
mark is registered, if the ad does not enable the average Internet user or enables
the user only with great difficulty, to ascertain whether the goods or services
originate from the trademark owner or an undertaking economically connected to it
or, on the contrary, originate from a third party46.
26.  Another decision47 was handed down by the ECJ recently following a referral from
the Netherlands.
The parties to the dispute both manufacture and sell mobile
buildings.  The plaintiff trades under the mark PORTAKABIN while the defendant
trades under the mark PRIMAKABIN.
Defendant purchased keywords from
Google, which consisted of plaintiff’s mark and minor spelling variations thereof.
Portakabin brought suit in an effort to enjoin Primakabin’s use of the mark in this
manner.  The Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court of the Netherlands)
referred a number of questions to the Court of Justice.
The ECJ endorsed its
ruling in LVMH v Google by reiterating that use of a trademark by an advertiser as
a keyword is “use in the course of trade48”.
The Court then provided further
clarification on how national courts should proceed in keyword cases.
27.  The Court referred to Article 6(1)(b) and 6(1)(c) of the Trademarks Directive, which
limit the effects of the trademark holders rights in order to ensure free movement
of goods and services within the Community49.
Whether or not a defendant in a
keyword advertising case can rely on these provisions is a matter for the national
court to determine50 based on whether the use has been “in accordance with
honest practices in industrial or commercial matters51”.
This standard involves a
“duty to act fairly in relation to the legitimate interests of the trademark
proprietor52”.
45 Google France SARL v Louis Vuitton Malletier SA (C-236/08, C-237/08 & C-238/08) [2010]
paragraph 119.
46 Google France SARL v Louis Vuitton Malletier SA (C-236/08, C-237/08 & C-238/08) [2010] paragraph 99.
47 Portakabin Ltd v Primakabin BV, Case C-558/08.
48 Case C-558/08, paragraph 27.
49 Case C-558/08, paragraph 57.
Under Article 6(1)(b) the trademark holder cannot prohibit a third party
from using indications concerning the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical origin,
the time of production of goods or of rendering the service, or other characteristics of goods or services.
Under Article 6(1)(c) a third party can use the mark where it is necessary to indicate the intended purpose
of a product or service, in particular as accessories or spare parts.
50 Case C-558/08, paragraphs 61 and 65.
51 Case C-558/08, paragraph 66.
52 Case C-558/08, paragraph 67.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 9
28.  The Court also discussed Article 7 of the Trademarks Directive, which limits the
trademark holders rights based on regional exhaustion53.
Under that provision, the
trademark owner cannot prohibit use of the mark for the resale of goods which
were manufactured and placed on the market within the EEA by the trademark
owner or with his consent, unless there is a legitimate reason54.
The Court
declared that a legitimate reason arises where the use is seriously detrimental to
the reputation of the mark or the reseller gives the impression that he is
economically linked to the trademark owner.
The Court went on to provide further
guidance for assessing whether a legitimate reason exists: merely using the mark
with additional wording such as “used” or “second hand” is not a legitimate reason;
removing reference to the mark by relabeling with the resellers name is a
legitimate reason; using the mark to advertise the resale of second hand goods,
where some of the goods for sale bear the mark and others do not, is not a
legitimate reason unless there is a risk of serious damage to the mark’s image due
to the volume, presentation or poor quality of the other goods being sold55.
United Kingdom
29.  In the United Kingdom, Interflora initiated suit against Marks and Spencer56 for
bidding on its trademark as an Adword.
The Court initially referred ten questions
to the ECJ for clarification, however following the ECJ’s ruling in Google v LVM,
the number of questions has been reduced to four57.
Thus, even after the ECJ’s
recent clarifications, the English courts maintain that further clarification is required
on what exactly constitutes “use” within the meaning of Article 5(1) and (2) of the
Trademarks Directive and Article 9(1) of the CTM Regulation.
India
30.  In the case of Consim Info v Google58 the Madras High Court in Chennai issued a
preliminary injunction to prevent Google from selling registered trademarks as
keywords to competitors of the trademark owner.
The plaintiff, Consim Info
operated matrimonial websites and claimed that when a user entered plaintiff’s
53 “The proprietor’s right to prohibit all third parties from using the mark is exhausted where goods have been
placed on the market in the EEA under that trademark by the proprietor or with his consent, unless there
are legitimate reasons for him to oppose further commercialization of the goods.”
Case C-558/08,
paragraph 74.
54 The reason must be legitimate within the meaning of Article 7(2).
55 Case C-558/08, paragraph 93.
56 Interflora Inc. v Marks and Spencer PLC, [2009] EWHC 1095 (Ch).
57 Interflora Inc. v Marks and Spencer PLC, [2010] EWHC 925 (Ch).
58 Judgment not yet available but see the following: Shamni Pande, Google Gets a Googly; Imagine
Opening a Webiste, Keying in a Few Search Terms and Presto!
You are on the Page of a Rival Website,
Business Today, New Delhi, November 1, 2009; Consim Info Sues Google,
http://www.medianama.com/2009/09/223-bharatmatrimony-google-naukri-shaadi-simplymarry-case-sues/;
Consim India Awaiting Madras High Court Verdict in Case Against Google,
http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report_consim-india-awaiting-madras-high-court-verdict-in-case-against-
google_1369237; Peter Ollier, Keyword Disputes Go Global, Managing Intellectual Property, 25
March 2010, http://www.managingip.com/Article/2452473/Search-Results/Keyword-disputes-go-
global.html? Keywords=keyword+disputes+go+global&Quick=True&OrderType=.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 10
marks as Google search terms, sponsored links appeared for plaintiff’s
competitors.  It appears that the ruling has not yet been published59.
Therefore, it
is not possible to analyze the reasoning of the Court in this case.
Naturally
however, the fact that the Court restrained Google’s activities in this instance
implies that the national law requirement that defendant has used the mark “in the
course of trade60” was satisfied.
China
31.  In China, two keyword advertising lawsuits61, one initiated against Google China,
the other against Baidu62, have yielded different outcomes.
In Google v
Guangdong Ganyi Electrical Appliance Co Ltd, the plaintiff’s registered trademark
NEDFON was sold by Google as a keyword to a competitor.
The Court ruled that
the competitor in question had committed trademark infringement.
However,
Google itself was not held jointly liable for trademark infringement.
The Court
determined that, although use of a keyword to trigger sponsored links was a form
of advertising, Google neither had the ability to check or control the information
submitted by the competitor, nor did it have an obligation to examine the legality of
that information.
32.  The Google case can be contrasted to the case of Baidu v Shanghai Dazhong
House-moving Logistics Co Ltd.
Baidu’s bid ranking service allowed Dazhong’s
competitors to link their websites to the keywords “Dazhong Banchang”.
Here, the
Court ordered Baidu to pay compensation to Dazhong.
Israel
33.  In the case of Matim Li v Crazy Line63, both parties to the litigation were retailers of
ladies fashion.
Matim Li claimed that its trademarks had been purchased by Crazy
Line through the Google Adword program, so that the Crazy Line website
appeared as the first link, in bold, following a user’s search for those marks.
The
Court dismissed Matim Li’s claim of trademark infringement on the basis that there
was no consumer confusion or likelihood of such.
The Court noted in this regard
that neither the ad itself, nor the link to the website made reference to plaintiff’s
trademarks.  It is interesting to note that the Court in this case did not focus on
whether the marks were being “used” as trademarks, but instead based its
59 A search of the Madras Law Journal Online Legal Library (http://mljlibrary.com) yielded no judgment for
the case.  (Search conducted July 21 2010.)
60 As provided for by the relevant legislation in India, (Section 29 of the Trademark Act 1999.)
61 For further information on both cases, see Article by Kangxin Partners on Internet Issues in China, World
Trademark Review, February/March 2009, available at,
http://www.worldtrademarkreview.com/issues/article.ashx?
g=45245d9b-732a-47c2-9d80-
22a0c6aff0cc&q=kangxin#search=%22kangxin%22, see also Keyword Disputes Go Global, Peter Ollier,
Managing Intellectual Property, 25 March 2010.
62 Baidu is a Chinese language internet search provider.
63 Decision of the District Court of Tel Aviv-Jaffa, 31 July 2006 – Action No. 000506/06, cited by Zohar
Efroni, Keywording in Search Engines as Trademark Infringement: Issues Arising from Matim Li v.
Crazy
Line, IIC 2007, 38(2), 204-223.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 11
dismissal on a lack of likelihood of confusion64.
The Court opined that internet
users were aware that much of the information produced following a search would
not be directly relevant to their query and that consumers anticipated exposure to
advertisements.
The Court highlighted the important role that search engines play
in allowing users to locate information on the internet and also the need for
commercial incentives (paid advertising) to foster continued innovation in the
area65.
Argentina
34.  In the case of Organización Veraz v Open Discovery, the plaintiff, a financial
services company, sued the defendant for purchasing its mark VERAZ as a
keyword.  The Court held that the defendant had engaged in an unauthorized use
in commerce of the plaintiff’s mark with the aim of attracting consumers that were
interested in the plaintiff’s services66.
According to the Court, this use could cause
confusion or mistake as to the origin of the services or could suggest an
association between the two companies67.
The Court held that in these
circumstances, the trademark holder could prevent the unauthorized use of its
mark by a competitor68.
Australia
35.  The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) brought suit
against Google and a classifieds website named Trading Post because the latter
party purchased keywords constituting the marks of car dealerships.
Trading Post
was a competitor of these dealerships for automotive sales.
This case stands out
from the others referred to in this document on the basis that the ACCC did not
found its claim on trademark infringement.
Rather, the ACCC alleged a violation of
the Trade Practices Act 1974, claiming misleading or deceptive conduct and a
false representation of an approval or affiliation69.
Trading Post settled out of court
by giving an undertaking not to continue the advertising practices complained of70.
It appears however, that the case against Google is still pending.
Although not
founded upon trademark infringement, the allegations made by the ACCC are
significant insofar as they relate to the issue of consumer confusion, which as
highlighted in many of the cases above, has been deemed determinative of
trademark infringement.
64 Zohar Efroni, Keywording in Search Engines as Trademark Infringement: Issues Arising from Matim Li v.
Crazy Line, IIC 2007, 38(2), 204-223 at 212.
65 For English translation of the judgment see IIC 2007, 38(2), 238.
66 See Graciela Perez de Inzaurraga, Trademarks and the Internet, Metatags and Keywords; A Latin
American Perspective,
https://www.aippi.org/download/reports/forum/forum09/2/ForumSession2_Presentation_Perrez.pdf.
67 Graciela Perez de Inzaurraga, supra.
68 Graciela Perez de Inzaurraga, supra.
69 See ACCC Press Release # MR 180/07, Available at
http://www.accc.gov.au/content/index.phtml/itemId/792088/fromItemId/142.
70 The Undertaking is available at
http://www.accc.gov.au/content/item.phtml?
itemId=826159&nodeId=cf68136e565d04bb6b150000112728
a5&fn=Undertaking.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 12
Austria
36.  In Austria, the online wine store, “Wein & Co” sued a competitor, “Weinwelt” for
purchasing its mark as a keyword.71 When a user entered the term “Wein & Co”
the first link listed at the top of the results page was for defendant’s website.
The
Austrian Supreme Court ruled that this use of the mark as a keyword infringed the
rights of the plaintiff on the basis that the appearance of the link above the search
results, using the plaintiff’s mark as a header, created a danger of consumer
confusion and gave the impression that the defendant was a company closely
related to the plaintiff.
It is important to emphasize that the facts of this case
involved use of plaintiff’s trademark in the header of the ad itself.
III.  Trademark Infringement in Virtual Worlds and Social Media
37.  In recent years, virtual worlds, or massively multiplayer online role playing games
(MMORPGs) have enjoyed an immense surge in popularity72.
Although the term
“virtual world” can encompass many types of online community73, this analysis will,
by way of example, consider “Second Life”, an online social community created by
Linden Labs74.
38.  There are a number of reasons why Second Life warrants special attention with
respect to trademarks, when compared to other virtual worlds.
First, Second Life
facilitates and encourages user generated content75.
This means that there are a
vast number of potential infringers that may be difficult to identify in “real life”.
User generated content can be sold to other users for virtual currency, which can
in turn, be exchanged for “real” currency76.
This introduces a significant
commercial dynamic to the activities occurring in Second Life.
Users who create
71 Supreme Court of Austria (Oberster Gerichtshof), 20 March 2007 – 17 Ob 1/07, MMR 2007, 497.
For a
discussion of the case, see Wiebke Baars, Marc Schuler, Charles Lloyd, Keyword-Advertising, Legal
Implications in Germany, France and the UK, Available at
http://www.taylorwessing.com/uploads/tx_siruplawyermanagement/Baars_Schuler_Lloyd_CRi.en.pdf.
72 See generally, Andreas M.
Kaplan and Michael Haenlein, Consumer Use and Business Potential of Virtual
Worlds: The Case of “Second Life,” International Journal on Media Management, 11: 93-101, (2009).
73 Candidus Dougherty and Greg Lastowka identifiy three different types of virtual world: game worlds,
social worlds and user generated worlds.
Virtual Trademarks,24 Santa Clara Computer & High Tech.
L.J.
749 at 759-773.
74 Second Life employs the following terminology: users are referred to as “residents” and residents are
represented on screen by their “avatars”.
An avatar is a virtual character that the user can control and
personalize.  Residents interact with each other using their avatars.
75 See Mark A.
Armitage, Virtual Trademark Infringement in a Virtual World?
Landslide, March/April 2009.
76 See, The Virtual Brand Footprint: The Marketing Opportunity in Second Life, available at
http://www.popcha.com/combinedstory_whitepaper.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 13
content retain IP rights in their creations77.
Many “real life” brands have
established themselves within Second Life78.
Finally, Second Life is the most
popular and successful virtual world of its kind79.
39.  Thus, although Second Life is a virtual environment, there is a real commercial
element and a risk that users may create and sell digital content, which infringes
the trademark rights of real life brands.
Furthermore, there is a risk that users may
create and sell digital content in violation of the rights which have accrued to other
users of Second Life.
Both of these scenarios have given rise to recent litigation.
An examination of the cases will help highlight the relevant issues of trademark
law in this area.
Cases
United States of America
Taser International Inc. v Linden Research Inc.80
40.  Following the alleged sale of virtual stun guns in Second Life, which were labeled
with the TASER mark, the plaintiff initiated suit against Linden in the District of
Arizona claiming trademark infringement, dilution by blurring, dilution by
tarnishment, in addition to design patent infringement.
Although the case was
voluntarily dismissed81, presumably following a settlement, the complaint
underscores the willingness of brand owners to enforce their trademarks,
notwithstanding that the goods sold were utterly intangible.
Unquestionably, the
fact that some brands have established an authorized commercial presence in
Second Life increases the likelihood that users may be confused as to the origin of
the virtual goods.
In other words, the user may be led to believe that the brand
has authorized virtual reproductions of its products or marks within Second Life.
Eros LLC. v Linden Research Inc.82
41.  The Taser complaint is an example of a “real life” brand suing for an unauthorized
use of its mark in the virtual environment.
As alluded to earlier however, it is also
possible for a “virtual brand” to bring suit in similar circumstances.
In the Eros
case, a class action lawsuit was initiated against Linden by Second Life
77 See Harris Weems Henderson, Through The Looking Glass: Copyright Protection in the Virtual Reality of
Second Life, 16 J.
Intell.  Prop.  L. 165 at 172 (2008).
78 American Apparel, Gibson Guitars, Coca Cola, Adidas, BMW and Harvard Law School have all
established a presence in Second Life.
79 Dougherty and Lastowka, supra, at 768.
80 See Matthew Asbell, A Stunning Development: Taser International Inc.
Sues the Owners of the Second
Life Virtual World, Mondaq, May 11, 2009.
81 See Matthew Asbell, A Stunning Development: Taser International Inc.
Sues the Owners of the Second
Life Virtual World, Mondaq, May 11, 2009.
82 U.S.  District Court for the Northern District of California, Case No.
09-CV-4269.  The Complaint is
available at
http://www.3dinternetlaw.com/Trademark/Trademark/Eros_v_Linden_files/Eros%20v.
%20Linden%20Com
plaint.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 14
content-creators for virtual counterfeiting of their products.
The named plaintiff
sells adult themed virtual products, which have been described as “software code
applications designed to facilitate sexual connections between Avatars83”.
42.  By contrast to TASER, the SEXGEN mark has not been applied to tangible “real
life” goods.  Nonetheless, the plaintiff has registered SEXGEN as a service mark
with the USPTO for “providing temporary use of non-downloadable software for
animating three-dimensional virtual characters84” and is relying on this registration
in the pending lawsuit.
43.  In cases such as Eros, a crucial analysis for the Court to engage in is whether or
not sales, which take place exclusively in the virtual environment, are sufficient to
satisfy the “use in commerce” requirement.
This is important considering that
there is no tangible transfer in the “real world”.
However, Eros’ registration clearly
anticipates and precludes such a transfer by inclusion of the term
“non-downloadable”.
Therefore, it is arguable that Eros is providing a service to
users of Second Life on a commercial basis and this satisfies the use in commerce
requirement.  In any event, this seems to be a novel issue of trademark use on the
internet and may continue to give rise to litigation.
Hermann Miller
44.  In addition to lawsuits, brand owners monitoring Second Life have sought to
remedy infringements of their marks through alternative means.
When the
furniture maker Herman Miller discovered unauthorized use of its AERON mark on
virtual chairs, the manufacturer offered legitimate virtual versions of the chairs for
free to users in exchange for a return of the virtual knock offs85.
This example
illustrates that retaining control of the mark in the virtual world is as important, and
probably more so, than profiting directly from the sale of virtual goods.
This is
especially true, considering that the unauthorized sale of virtual goods may dilute
the mark and erode the mark’s distinctiveness.
Social Media
45.  In recent years, online social networking has experienced a dramatic rise in
popularity across the globe.
Beyond the purely social ramifications, websites such
as Facebook, Twitter, MySpace, YouTube and Linkedin have become forums of
immense significance, professionally86, politically87 and commercially88.
Focusing
83 Benjamin R.
Mulcahy, Second Life Raises Novel IP Issues, Among Them is Whether Use of a Trademark
Exclusively in a Virtual World can be Use in Commerce, Nat’l L.
J.  Vol.  30, No.  14, (Dec 3, 2007).
84 Registration No.
3483253.
85 Kieran G.  Doyle, Brands on the Silver Screen, the Television Screen and the Computer Screen, Practising
Law Institute, Patents, Copyrights, Trademarks Property Course Handbook Series, PLI Order No.
23481,
199 at 221 (April 2010).
86 The New York Times reports that 75% of US recruiters and human resource professionals conduct online
research about candidates and this research encompasses social networking sites.
Jeffrey Rosen, The
Web Means the End of Forgetting, New York Times Magazine, July 19, 2010.
87 See Jose Antonio Vargas, Politics and Social Networks: Voters Make the Connection, Washington Post,
November 3, 2008.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 15
on the commercial dimension of such websites, it is important to analyze some
issues relating to the interests of brand owners and the wider implications for the
international trademark law framework.
46.  Because the leading social networking sites differ in terms of market orientation,
presentation, and policies, it is helpful to proceed by way of example, rather than
by discussing the issues in generality.
Facebook
47.  Facebook describes itself as a “social utility that helps people communicate more
efficiently with their friends, family and coworkers89”.
This communication is
achieved primarily through profile pages or group pages where users can post
comments, photographs and links.
Although headquartered in the United States
of America, 70% of Facebook’s 400 million active users are located in other
countries90.  Thus, activities taking place on Facebook implicate the trademark
laws of many jurisdictions.
48.  On June 12, 2009 Facebook rolled out “vanity URLs”, which allow users to have a
unique identifier/username (e.g. www.facebook.com/YourName)91.
This new
facility posed a potential risk to the interests of brand owners as users could,
theoretically, choose a name consisting of a trademark.
Recognizing this concern,
Facebook afforded rights holders a “sunrise period92” during which they could
register their trademarks as “Facebook URLs” prior to opening registration to the
general public.
49.  Many brand owners have embraced the “vanity URL” facility and established an
official Facebook page to interact and communicate with their customers and other
Facebook users93.
These pages utilize vanity URLs in the following manner:
www.facebook.com/brandname.
Considering the prevalence of marks being used
with authorization throughout the site, there is an increased risk that unauthorized
use of marks on the site will lead to consumer confusion.
In light of this risk,
Facebook has established a mechanism for reporting infringing usernames.
If a
trademark owner discovers that a third party’s username consists of their
registered trademark, they can fill out an automated IP infringement form94, so that
Facebook can remove the page or disable access.
[Footnote continued from previous page]
88 For example, many brands have successfully established themselves on Twitter.
See the case studies
offered by twitter at www.business.twitter.com/twitter101/
89 http://www.facebook.com/?
ref=home#! /press/info.php?
factsheet
90 http://www.facebook.com/?
ref=home#! /press/info.php?
factsheet
91 Sally M.  Abel, Trademarks and Rights of Publicity in the Converged World, 978 PLI/Pat 57, at 61 (2009).
92 Adam Smith, International – Engage: Trademark Protection in Social Media, World Trademark Review,
Nov 4 2009.
93 For illustrative purposes, a Facebook search conducted on July 28, 2010 revealed that among many
others, the following brands were operating seemingly official pages: Dell, BMW, Lacoste, Swatch,
Renault, Fosters, Walmart, Guinness.
94 Available at http://www.facebook.com/copyright.php?
noncopyright_notice=1
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 16
50.  Facebook’s rules and procedures concerning the registration of usernames are
also important to note.
Generic terms are not eligible for registration95.
Thus, there
is a correlation between Facebook usernames and trademarks insofar as brand
owners should not suffer a commercial impediment simply because they were not
first in time to register a term, which is necessary to communicate effectively with
the market.  Also, Facebook usernames are not transferable96.
Presumably, this
restriction helps to avoid bad faith registrations by parties who do not own the
rights for a particular mark.
Furthermore, Facebook provides that usernames,
which have been removed, will not be made available to other users.
51.  If Facebook continues to grow exponentially97 and gain commercial significance in
multiple jurisdictions, the appropriate framework for dealing with trademark
controversies may increase in complexity.
For example, the current form for
reporting an infringing username requires a trademark registration number98.
Moreover, the form states a preference for US registration numbers.
It is unclear
whether the procedure is adequately equipped to deal with territorial conflicts,
complaints of brand owners lacking a US registration, or brand owners simply
asserting common law rights in their marks.
Twitter
52.  Twitter describes itself as “a real-time information network powered by people all
around the world that lets users share and discover what’s happening now99”.
Users can write and read messages (“tweets”) of up to 140 characters in length
and these messages are made public to other users of the site100.
Users decide
what type of messages they would like to receive, such as messages from friends,
messages posted by their favorite celebrities, or messages relating to a particular
topic.
53.  Like Facebook, Twitter is headquartered in the United States of America but is
used internationally and translations are available in French, German, Italian,
Japanese and Spanish101.
54.  For trademark owners, Twitter carries a risk that people ‘tweeting’ about a
particular brand may mislead other users as to the authorized or unauthorized
nature of their use of the mark.
This risk of confusion is exacerbated by the
constant flow of rapidly disseminating information over the site and the fact that
many businesses have established an official profile on Twitter102.
95 http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?
post=90316352130
96 http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?
post=90316352130
97 Facebook reports that in January 2009, the site had 150 million active users, whereas by February 2010,
the number had grown to 400 million active users.
See http://www.facebook.com/press/info.php?
timeline
98 See http://www.facebook.com/help/?
page=899#! /help/contact.php?
show_form=username_infringement
99 www.twitter.com/about
100 www.business.twitter.com/twitter101
101 www.twitter.com/about
102 See the case studies offered by twitter at www.business.twitter.com/twitter101/
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 17
55.  To counteract the risks of trademark infringement, Twitter has enacted a
trademark policy103, which allows brand owners to report trademark violations.
Twitter states that it will suspend a user’s account if there is a clear intention to
mislead others through the unauthorized use of a mark104.
In instances where an
account appears to be confusing users but is not purposefully passing itself off as
the brand/company/product, the account holder will be notified and given an
opportunity to clear up any potential confusion105.
56.  Twitter has been sued on at least two occasions for trademark infringement;
however both cases were voluntarily dismissed.
In the case of La Russa v Twitter
Inc.106 the plaintiff was a manager of baseball teams in the United States.
An
anonymous user created a Twitter account in the plaintiff’s name, impersonated
him and posted inappropriate comments on the deaths of two of his team’s
pitchers107.  The plaintiff claimed, inter alia, that Twitter had committed trademark
infringement.
In order to succeed on this claim, it would be necessary for plaintiff
to prove that the false account was likely to confuse consumers into thinking he
endorsed Twitter108.
Plaintiff sought to support this claim by alleging that his photo
was used in conjunction with the phrases “Tony La Russa is using Twitter” and
“Join today to start receiving Tony La Russa’s updates109”.
The plaintiff voluntarily
dismissed his claim shortly after filing110.
57.  In the case of Oneok Inc v Twitter Inc111, a natural gas distributor brought suit
against Twitter for allowing a third party to adopt its trademark ONEOK as a
username.  The complaint alleged that messages posted by the user were
misleading insofar as consumers would believe that they were official statements
of the company112.
This lawsuit was voluntarily dismissed shortly after filing and
the Twitter account in question was transferred to the plaintiff113.
103 http://support.twitter.com/groups/33-report-a-violation/topics/122-reporting-violations/articles/18367-
trademark-policy
104 http://support.twitter.com/groups/33-report-a-violation/topics/122-reporting-violations/articles/18367-
trademark-policy
105 http://support.twitter.com/groups/33-report-a-violation/topics/122-reporting-violations/articles/18367-
trademark-policy
106 Case No.  CV-09-2503 (N.D.C.A.
June 5, 2009).
107 Adam Smith, United States – Trademarks and Tweets: Brand Protection on Twitter, World Trademark
Review, June 16 2009.
108 William McGeveran, Celebrity Impersonation and Section 230, June 25, 2009,
http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/infolaw/2009/06/25/impersonation-and-230/
109    Jillian Bluestone, La Russa’s Loophole: Trademark Infringement Lawsuits and Social Networks, 17 Vill.
Sports & Ent.
L.  J. 573, at 575.
110 Liisa M.  Thomas and Robert H.
Newman, Five Steps to Protect Your Trademarks in the Web 2.0 World,
INTA Bulletin, May 15, 2010, Vol.
65, No 10.
111 Case No. 4:09-cv-00597 (N.D.O.K.
Sep 15, 2009)
112 Darren B.
Cohen, Meredith B.
Pikser, Dr.  Alexander R.  Klett, Sachin Premnath, Social Media in Action in
Trademarks, March 8, 2010, http://www.legalbytes.com/2010/03/articles/social-and-digital-media-
law/social-media-in-action-in-trademarks/
113 Ibid.
SCT/24/4
Annex I, page 18
58.  Although the La Russa case and the Oneok case did not give rise to judicial
pronouncements on Twitter’s liability, the facts of these cases illustrate the
potential problems facing trademark owners.
Because many brands are using an
official Twitter page to communicate with their customers, there is a risk that
non-authorized use of the brand name on Twitter may confuse consumers into
thinking that they are interacting with an official representative of the brand.
If the
messages are in bad taste114 or convey inaccurate information, this may damage
brand reputation.
[Annex II follows]
114 Even official Twitter accounts are susceptible to offensive posts by company employees.
See Richard
Wray and Charles Arthur, Vodafone Suspends Employee After Obscene Tweet, The Guardian, February
6, 2010, available at http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2010/feb/05/vodafone-twitter-obscene-tweet
SCT/24/4
ANNEX II
JOINT RECOMMENDATION CONCERNING PROVISIONS ON THE PROTECTION OF MARKS
AND OTHER INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY RIGHTS IN SIGNS ON THE INTERNET
(WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES)
adopted by the Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial Property
and the General Assembly of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
at the Thirty-Six Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of the Member States of WIPO
September 24 to October 3, 2001
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 2
PREFACE
The Joint Recommendation Concerning the Protection of Marks, and Other Industrial
Property Rights in Signs, on the Internet, which includes the text of the provisions as
adopted by the Standing Committee on the Law of Trademarks, Industrial Designs and
Geographical Indications (SCT) at its sixth session (March 12 to 16, 2001), was adopted
at a joint session of the Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial
Property and the General Assembly of the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO) at the Thirty-Sixth Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of the Member States of
WIPO (September 24 - October 3, 2001).
Initiated at the first session of the SCT (July 13 to 17, 1998), the issue relating to the
protection of marks on the Internet was discussed at the second session, second part of
the SCT (June 7 to 11, 1999) and at the third session of the SCT (November 8
to 12, 1999).
Draft provisions concerning the protection of marks on the Internet were
discussed by the SCT at its fourth session (March 27 to 31, 2000), at its fifth session
(September 11 to 15, 2000) and at its sixth session (March 12 to 16, 2001).
The provisions aim at providing a clear legal framework for trademark owners who wish to
use their marks on the Internet and to participate in the development of electronic
commerce.  They are intended to facilitate the application of existing laws relating to
marks, and other industrial property rights in signs, on the Internet, and to be applied in
the context of:
- determining whether, under the applicable law, use of a sign on the Internet has
contributed to the acquisition, maintenance or infringement of a mark or other
industrial property right in the sign, or whether such use constitutes an act of
unfair competition;
- enabling owners of conflicting rights in identical or similar signs to use these signs
concurrently on the Internet;
- determining remedies.
The determination of the applicable law itself is not addressed by the present provisions,
but left to the private international laws of individual Member States.
Further to the adoption by the WIPO Assemblies of the Joint Recommendation
Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Well-known Marks, in September 1999, and of
the Joint Recommendation Concerning Trademark Licenses in September 2000, this Joint
Recommendation is the third achievement of the SCT in implementing WIPO’s policy of
finding new ways to accelerate the development of international harmonized principles.
This new approach to the progressive development of international intellectual property
law was implemented by WIPO pursuant to the WIPO Program and Budget for the
biennium 1998-99.
This volume contains the text of the Joint Recommendation, the accompanying provisions,
and explanatory notes prepared by the International Bureau.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Joint Recommendation.......................................................................................................5
Preamble ............................................................................................................................6
Part I: General ..........................................................................................................7
Article 1: Abbreviated Expressions .....................................................................7
Part II: Use of a Sign on the Internet .........................................................................7
Article 2: Use of a Sign on the Internet in a Member State ................................7
Article 3: Factors for Determining Commercial Effect in a Member State ..........8
Article 4: Bad Faith..............................................................................................9
Part III: Acquisition and Maintenance of Rights in Signs..........................................10
Article 5: Use of a Sign on the Internet and Acquisition and Maintenance of Rights..10
Part IV: Infringement and Liability .............................................................................10
Article 6: Use of a Sign on the Internet, Infringement of Rights and
Acts of Unfair Competition .................................................................10
Article 7: Liability for Infringement and Acts of Unfair Competition Under the
Applicable Law...................................................................................10
Article 8: Exceptions and Limitations Under the Applicable Law......................10
Part V: Notice and Avoidance of Conflict .................................................................11
Article 9: Use Prior to Notification of Infringement............................................11
Article 10: Use After Notification of Infringement................................................11
Article 11: Notification Under Articles 9 and 10 ..................................................11
Article 12: Disclaimer as a Measure Under Article 10 ........................................12
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 4
Part VI: Remedies .....................................................................................................12
Article 13: Remedy Proportionate to Commercial Effect ....................................12
Article 14: Limitations of Use of a Sign on the Internet.......................................13
Article 15: Limitation on Prohibition to Use a Sign on the Internet .....................13
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 5
JOINT RECOMMENDATION
The Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial Property and the General
Assembly of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO);
Taking into account the provisions of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial
Property;
Recommend that each Member State may consider the use of any of the provisions
adopted by the Standing Committee on the Law of Trademarks, Industrial Designs and
Geographical Indications (SCT) at its sixth session, as guidelines concerning the
protection of marks, and other industrial property rights in signs, on the Internet;
It is further recommended to each Member State of the Paris Union or of WIPO which is
also a member of a regional intergovernmental organization that has competence in the
area of registration of trademarks, to bring these provisions to the attention of that
organization.
[Provisions follow]
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 6
PREAMBLE
Recognizing that the present provisions are intended to facilitate the application of
existing laws relating to marks and other industrial property rights in signs, and existing
laws relating to unfair competition, to the use of signs on the Internet;
Recognizing that Member States will apply, wherever possible, existing laws relating to
marks and other industrial property rights in signs, and existing laws relating to unfair
competition, to the use of signs on the Internet, directly or by analogy;
Recognizing that a sign used on the Internet is simultaneously and immediately accessible
irrespective of territorial location;
The present provisions are intended to be applied in the context of determining whether,
under the applicable law of a Member State, use of a sign on the Internet has contributed
to the acquisition, maintenance or infringement of a mark or other industrial property right
in the sign, or whether such use constitutes an act of unfair competition, and in the context
of determining remedies.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 7
PART I
GENERAL
Article 1
Abbreviated Expressions
For the purposes of these Provisions, unless expressly stated otherwise:
(i) “Member State” means a State member of the Paris Union for the Protection
of Industrial Property, of the World Intellectual Property Organization, or of both;
(ii) “Right” means an industrial property right in a sign under the applicable law,
whether registered or unregistered;
(iii) “Act of unfair competition” means any act of competition contrary to honest
business practices in industrial or commercial matters as defined in Article 10bis of the
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, signed in Paris on March 20,
1883, as revised and amended;
(iv) “Competent authority” means an administrative, judicial or quasi-judicial
authority of a Member State which is competent for determining whether a right has been
acquired, maintained or infringed, for determining remedies, or for determining whether an
act of competition constitutes an act of unfair competition, as the case may be;
(v) “Remedies” means the remedies which a competent authority of a Member
State can impose under the applicable law, as a result of an action for the infringement of
a right or an act of unfair competition;
(vi) “Internet” refers to an interactive medium for communication which contains
information that is simultaneously and immediately accessible irrespective of territorial
location to members of the public from a place and at a time individually chosen by them;
(vii) except where the context indicates otherwise, words in the singular include
the plural, and vice versa, and masculine personal pronouns include the feminine.
PART II
USE OF A SIGN ON THE INTERNET
Article 2
Use of a Sign on the Internet in a Member State
Use of a sign on the Internet shall constitute use in a Member State for the
purposes of these provisions, only if the use has a commercial effect in that Member State
as described in Article 3.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 8
Article 3
Factors for Determining Commercial Effect in a Member State
(1) [Factors] In determining whether use of a sign on the Internet has a
commercial effect in a Member State, the competent authority shall take into account all
relevant circumstances.
Circumstances that may be relevant include, but are not limited
to:
(a) circumstances indicating that the user of the sign is doing, or has undertaken
significant plans to do, business in the Member State in relation to goods or services
which are identical or similar to those for which the sign is used on the Internet.
(b) the level and character of commercial activity of the user in relation to the
Member State, including:
(i) whether the user is actually serving customers located in the Member
State or has entered into other commercially motivated relationships with persons located
in the Member State;
(ii) whether the user has stated, in conjunction with the use of the sign on
the Internet, that he does not intend to deliver the goods or services offered to customers
located in the Member State and whether he adheres to his stated intent;
(iii) whether the user offers post-sales activities in the Member State,
such as warranty or service;
(iv) whether the user undertakes further commercial activities in the
Member State which are related to the use of the sign on the Internet but which are not
carried out over the Internet.
(c) the connection of an offer of goods or services on the Internet with the Member
State, including:
(i) whether the goods or services offered can be lawfully delivered in the
Member State;
(ii) whether the prices are indicated in the official currency of the Member
State.
(d) the connection of the manner of use of the sign on the Internet with the Member
State, including:
(i) whether the sign is used in conjunction with means of interactive
contact which are accessible to Internet users in the Member State;
(ii) whether the user has indicated, in conjunction with the use of the
sign, an address, telephone number or other means of contact in the Member State;
(iii) whether the sign is used in connection with a domain name which is
registered under the ISO Standard country code 3166 Top Level Domain referring to the
Member State;
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 9
(iv) whether the text used in conjunction with the use of the sign is in a
language predominantly used in the Member State;
(v) whether the sign is used in conjunction with an Internet location which
has actually been visited by Internet users located in the Member State.
(e) the relation of the use of the sign on the Internet with a right in that sign in the
Member State, including:
(i) whether the use is supported by that right;
(ii) whether, where the right belongs to another, the use would take
unfair advantage of, or unjustifiably impair, the distinctive character or the reputation of the
sign that is the subject of that right.
(2) [Relevance of Factors] The above factors, which are guidelines to assist the
competent authority to determine whether the use of a sign has produced a commercial
effect in a Member State, are not pre-conditions for reaching that determination.
Rather,
the determination in each case will depend upon the particular circumstances of that case.
In some cases all of the factors may be relevant.
In other cases some of the factors may
be relevant.  In still other cases none of the factors may be relevant, and the decision may
be based on additional factors that are not listed in paragraph (1), above.
Such additional
factors may be relevant, alone, or in combination with one or more of the factors listed in
paragraph (1), above.
Article 4
Bad Faith
(1) [Bad Faith] For the purposes of applying these provisions, any relevant
circumstance shall be considered in determining whether a sign was used in bad faith, or
whether a right was acquired in bad faith.
(2) [Factors] In particular, the competent authority shall take into consideration,
inter alia:
(i) whether the person who used the sign or acquired the right in the sign
had knowledge of a right in an identical or similar sign belonging to another, or could not
have reasonably been unaware of that right, at the time when the person first used the
sign, acquired the right or filed an application for acquisition of the right, whichever is
earlier, and
(ii) whether the use of the sign would take unfair advantage of, or
unjustifiably impair, the distinctive character or the reputation of the sign that is the subject
of the other right.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 10
PART III
ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE OF RIGHTS IN SIGNS
Article 5
Use of a Sign on the Internet and Acquisition and Maintenance of Rights
Use of a sign on the Internet in a Member State, including forms of use that are
made possible by technological advances, shall in every case be taken into consideration
for determining whether the requirements under the applicable law of the Member State
for acquiring or maintaining a right in the sign have been met.
PART IV
INFRINGEMENT AND LIABILITY
Article 6
Use of a Sign on the Internet, Infringement of Rights and Acts of Unfair Competition
Use of a sign on the Internet, including forms of use that are made possible by
technological advances, shall be taken into consideration for determining whether a right
under the applicable law of a Member State has been infringed, or whether the use
amounts to an act of unfair competition under the law of that Member State, only if that
use constitutes use of the sign on the Internet in that Member State.
Article 7
Liability for Infringement and Acts of Unfair Competition Under the Applicable Law
Except where otherwise provided for in these provisions, there shall be liability in a
Member State under the applicable law when a right is infringed, or an act of unfair
competition is committed, through use of a sign on the Internet in that Member State.
Article 8
Exceptions and Limitations Under the Applicable Law
A Member State shall apply the exceptions to liability, and the limitations to the
scope of rights, existing under the applicable law when applying these provisions to the
use of a sign on the Internet in that Member State.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 11
PART V
NOTICE AND AVOIDANCE OF CONFLICT
Article 9
Use Prior to Notification of Infringement
If the use of a sign on the Internet in a Member State is alleged to infringe a right in
that Member State, the user of that sign shall not be held liable for such infringement prior
to receiving a notification of infringement, if:
(i) the user owns a right in the sign in another Member State or uses the
sign with the consent of the owner of such a right, or is permitted to use the sign, in the
manner in which it is being used on the Internet, under the law of another Member State to
which the user has a close connection;
(ii) any acquisition of a right in the sign, and any use of the sign, has not
been in bad faith; and
(iii) the user has provided, in conjunction with the use of the sign on the
Internet, information reasonably sufficient to contact him by mail, e-mail or telefacsimile.
Article 10
Use After Notification of Infringement
If the user referred to in Article 9 has received a notification that his use infringes
another right, he shall not be held liable if he
(i) indicates to the person sending the notification that he owns a right in
the sign in another Member State, or uses the sign with the consent of the owner of such a
right, or that he is permitted to use the sign, in the manner in which it is being used on the
Internet, under the law of another Member State to which he has a close connection;
(ii) gives relevant details of that right or permitted use; and
(iii) expeditiously takes reasonable measures which are effective to avoid
a commercial effect in the Member State referred to in the notification, or to avoid
infringement of the right referred to in the notification.
Article 11
Notification Under Articles 9 and 10
The notification under Articles 9 and 10 shall be effective if it is sent by the owner of
a right or his representative, by mail, e-mail or telefacsimile, and indicates, in the
language, or in one of the languages, used in conjunction with the use of the sign on the
Internet, the following:
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 12
(i) the right which is alleged to be infringed;
(ii) the identity of the owner of that right and information reasonably
sufficient to contact him or his representative by mail, e-mail or telefacsimile;
(iii) the Member State in which that right is protected;
(iv) relevant details of such protection allowing the user to assess the
existence, nature and scope of that right; and
(v) the use that is claimed to infringe that right.
Article 12
Disclaimer as a Measure Under Article 10
Member States shall accept, inter alia, a disclaimer, by a user referred to in
Article 9, as a reasonable and effective measure under Article 10, if:
(i) the disclaimer includes a clear and unambiguous statement in
conjunction with the use of the sign, to the effect that the user has no relationship with the
owner of the right which is alleged to be infringed, and does not intend to deliver the goods
or services offered to customers located in a particular Member State where the right is
protected;
(ii) the disclaimer is written in the language or in the languages used in
conjunction with the use of the sign on the Internet;
(iii) the user inquires, before the delivery of the goods or services,
whether customers are located in the Member State referred to in item (i); and
(iv) the user in fact refuses delivery to customers who have indicated that
they are located in that Member State.
PART VI
REMEDIES
Article 13
Remedy Proportionate to Commercial Effect
(1) The remedies provided for the infringement of rights or for acts of unfair
competition in a Member State, through use of a sign on the Internet in that Member State,
shall be proportionate to the commercial effect of the use in that Member State.
(2) The competent authority shall balance the interests, rights and circumstances
involved.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 13
(3) The user of the sign shall, upon request, be given the opportunity to propose an
effective remedy for consideration by the competent authority, prior to a decision on the
merits of the case.
Article 14
Limitations of Use of a Sign on the Internet
(1) In determining remedies, the competent authority shall take into account
limitations of use by imposing reasonable measures designed:
(i) to avoid a commercial effect in the Member State, or
(ii) to avoid infringement of the right or to avoid the act of unfair
competition.
(2) The measures referred to in paragraph (1) may include, inter alia:
(a) a clear and unambiguous statement in conjunction with the use of the sign on
the Internet, to the effect that the user has no relationship with the owner of the infringed
right or the person affected by the act of unfair competition, written in the language or in
the languages used in conjunction with the use of the sign on the Internet, and any other
language indicated by the competent authority;
(b) a clear and unambiguous statement in conjunction with the use of the sign on
the Internet to the effect that the user does not intend to deliver the goods or services
offered to customers located in a particular Member State, written in the language or in the
languages used in conjunction with the use of the sign on the Internet, and any other
language indicated by the competent authority;
(c) an obligation to inquire, before the delivery of the goods or services, whether
customers are located in that Member State, and to refuse delivery to customers who
have indicated that they are located in that Member State;
(d) gateway web pages.
Article 15
Limitation on Prohibition to Use a Sign on the Internet
(1) Where the use of a sign on the Internet in a Member State infringes a right, or
amounts to an act of unfair competition, under the laws of that Member State, the
competent authority of the Member State should avoid, wherever possible, imposing a
remedy that would have the effect of prohibiting any future use of the sign on the Internet.
(2) The competent authority shall not, in any case, impose a remedy that would
prohibit future use of the sign on the Internet, where
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 14
(i) the user owns a right in the sign in another Member State, uses the
sign with the consent of the owner of such a right, or is permitted to use the sign, in the
manner in which it is being used on the Internet, under the law of another Member State to
which the user has a close connection; and
(ii) any acquisition of a right in the sign, and any use of the sign, has not
been in bad faith.
[Explanatory Notes follow]
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 15
EXPLANATORY NOTES*
prepared by the International Bureau
Notes on the Preamble
0.01 The first and second recitals clarify that the present provisions do not constitute a
self-contained industrial property law for the Internet, but are intended to guide the application of
existing national or regional industrial property laws to legal problems resulting from the use of a
sign on the Internet.
0.02 The third recital emphasizes the main particularity of the Internet, its “global nature” which
challenges the territorial nature of national or regional laws.
These challenges require some
modifications in national or regional laws if marks and other rights in distinctive signs are to be
granted an adequate level of protection on the Internet.
0.03 The purpose of the present provisions is, therefore, to provide a link between the global
Internet and territorial laws and to make these laws Internet-compatible.
The present provisions
deal with all situations in which a competent authority is called upon to decide whether the use of
a sign on the Internet has, under the applicable national or regional law, contributed to acquiring,
maintaining or infringing a right in that sign, or whether such use constitutes an act of unfair
competition.  They also apply in the context of determining remedies.
0.04 The question of determining the applicable law is not addressed by the present
provisions, but left to the private international laws of individual Member States.
Once the
applicable national or regional law has been determined, it should be applied, directly or by
analogy, wherever this is possible.
Notes on Article 1
1.01 Items (i), (iii) and (v) appear self-explanatory.
1.02 Item (ii).
The present provisions are not limited to trademark rights, but include all types of
industrial property rights in signs existing under the applicable law.
The provisions do not limit
the freedom of Member States to determine the conditions for the protection of individual types of
rights.  Unregistered rights are included to the extent they are recognized under the applicable
law.  The provisions do not provide an exhaustive list of industrial property rights in signs.
Trademark rights are just one example; other examples could include trade names, or
geographical indications.
Item (ii) describes the scope of industrial property rights in signs
protected under national laws by reference to the following common characteristics of such
rights: (i) they belong to one person or a group of persons (whether individualized or, as in the
case of collective marks or geographical indications, defined in abstract terms) who may exclude
every other person from using the sign (“exclusive rights”), and (ii) these rights are only protected
* These notes were prepared by the International Bureau of the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) for explanatory purposes only.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 16
in a commercial context.
The present provisions neither limit the freedom of Member States to
determine what kinds of industrial property rights in signs they recognize, nor interfere with
obligations existing under international treaties, such as the Paris Convention.
The present
provisions do not apply in a purely non-commercial context.
It is left to the law of Member States
to determine whether and under what conditions they want to apply the provisions in a
non-commercial context.
1.03 The concept of “sign” is not defined in the provisions.
However, it follows from the
purpose of the provisions that they only refer to “distinctive” signs.
The provisions deal with the
question whether the use of a sign on the Internet can be considered in the context of
determining whether an industrial property right in that sign has been acquired, maintained, or
infringed, or whether such use constitutes an act of unfair competition.
Therefore, the provisions
only deal with the use of signs which, at least in the abstract, can serve to distinguish enterprises,
goods, etc. irrespective of whether the user of the sign owns a right in that sign.
Use of a sign
that cannot even in the abstract serve as a “distinctive sign” could not contribute to acquiring,
maintaining or infringing a right in such a sign, and would therefore be of no relevance for the
purpose of these provisions.
It is not required that the sign be actually used to distinguish
enterprises, goods, etc., as long as it can be used as such.
1.04 Item (iv).
The legal nature of the “competent authority” will depend on the national
system in a given Member State.
Item (iv) does not interfere with the power of Member States to
determine competence.
It has been drafted broadly in order to accommodate all systems that
might exist in Member States.
1.05 Item (vi).
This item gives a description of the term “Internet” without attempting to
provide a comprehensive definition.
This is emphasized by the use of the words “refers to”
instead of the word “means” used in the other items.
Given the rapid technological development
of that sector, a definition of the term “Internet” might soon be outdated.
As is emphasized in the
Preamble, one of the main particularities of the Internet is its “global nature,” the fact that a sign
used on the Internet is simultaneously and immediately accessible irrespective of territorial
location.  This particular feature challenges the territorial basis of laws relating to marks or other
industrial property rights in signs, and which therefore requires the application of the present
provisions.  The fact that the Internet allows a potentially unlimited number of users to access
certain content distinguishes it from telephone networks.
Its public nature distinguishes it from
private networks or Intranets.
Its interactivity, and the fact that it provides content to individual
members of the public at a time and from a place individually chosen by them distinguishes it
from television and broadcasting.
With regard to the last-mentioned aspect, item (vi) follows the
wording of Article 8 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and Article 14 of the WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT).
1.06 Item (vii).
This item has been added in order to facilitate the drafting of the provisions.
A
similar provision is contained in Article 1(xv) of the Patent Law Treaty.
1.07 References in the provisions to individual users or individual right owners also include
legal entities recognized under the applicable law.
Such entities can be regarded as users of a
sign or owners of a right to the extent that they have competence to act or to own a right under
the applicable law.
The provisions do, however, not interfere with the power of Member States to
determine the conditions for recognizing legal entities, and to regulate their structure and legal
competence.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 17
Notes on Article 2
2.01 The question whether use of a sign on the Internet can be regarded as having taken
place in a particular Member State is relevant for deciding whether such use should count
towards deciding whether the user has acquired, maintained or infringed a right that is protected
in the Member State, or whether he has committed an act of unfair competition in that Member
State.
2.02 Article 2 is based on the assumption that not each and every use of a sign on the Internet
should be treated as taking place in the Member State concerned, even though the use might be
accessible to Internet-users based in that State.
The effect of the provision is that only use that
has commercial repercussions in a given Member State, or, in other words, use that has a
“commercial effect” in that Member State, can be treated as having taken place in that Member
State.  The provisions introduce the term “use of a sign on the Internet in a Member State” as a
shorthand expression for use of a sign on the Internet which is deemed to have taken place in a
Member State as a result of its commercial effect.
2.03 The provision is only intended to deal with the question of whether use of a sign on the
Internet can be deemed to have taken place in a particular Member State.
The legal effects of
such use in that Member State would have to be determined under the applicable law in
accordance with Articles 5 and 6.
2.04 The term “commercial effect” has been chosen rather than “in the course of trade,” in
order to include situations in which a non-profit company has produced a commercial effect in a
particular country by using the sign on the Internet without using it “in the course of trade.”
It
should be noted that use of a sign on the Internet can have a commercial effect even before any
business transactions are carried out in that Member State.
2.05 The present provisions are only applicable to rights that are protected in a commercial
context.  In so far as Member States also protect certain rights in signs, such as personality
rights, in a purely non-commercial context, they are free to either to grant such protection in
relation to use of a sign on the Internet independently of whether such use has a commercial
effect, or to apply the present provisions.
Notes on Article 3
3.01 Paragraph (1).
The determination of whether use of a sign on the Internet has produced
a commercial effect in a particular Member State, and whether such use can be deemed to have
taken place in that Member State, shall be made on the basis of all relevant circumstances.
A
competent authority is free to determine which factors are relevant in a given case.
Once it has
identified the relevant factors, it is obliged to take them into account.
Paragraph (1) provides a
non-exhaustive list of factors that can be relevant.
The factors are grouped into various
categories for clarity.
3.02 Subparagraph (a).
This subparagraph contains two general principles and, in that regard,
supplements all following items.
First, doing business in a Member State is the most obvious
way of creating a commercial effect in that State.
Second, planning to do business in a Member
State can have a commercial effect in that Member State.
It should be noted, however, that use
of a sign on the Internet might have a commercial effect in a Member State even if the user was
not yet planning to do business in that particular Member State.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 18
3.03 Subparagraph (b).
This subparagraph invites a competent authority to determine
whether the level and character of commercial activity carried out in conjunction with the use of
the sign on the Internet contributes to a finding that such use has a commercial effect in that
Member State.
This does not mean, however, that there always has to be some commercial
activity in the Member State; use of a sign on the Internet can have a commercial effect in a
Member State even though the user of the sign does not, or not yet, carry out any commercial
activity.
3.04 Item (i).
The location of actual or prospective customers in the Member State is an
important factor for determining whether use of the sign in the context of actual delivery of goods
or services, or in the context of other commercially motivated relationships has a commercial
effect in that State.
Customers are located in the Member State if they are physically present in
the Member State at the time of the relevant activity.
For the purposes of these provisions,
“location” is a purely factual concept, for which mere presence in the State should be sufficient.
“Other commercially motivated relationships” include activities of the user that are, like direct
mailing of advertisements or product information, aimed at prospective customers in preparation
for the eventual future conclusion of commercial contracts.
3.05 Item (ii).
This item refers to what might be called a “territorial disclaimer.”
If a web site
contains a statement to the effect that the goods or services offered are not available in particular
Member States, it is less likely that such use would produce a commercial effect in those Member
States.  Such statements can either be drafted in a “positive” or in a “negative” way: The user
can, for example, expressly exclude particular Member States (“No delivery to customers located
in countries X, Y and Z”), or he can provide an exclusive list of countries in which the goods or
services are available (“Delivery only to countries A, B, and C”), which would implicitly exclude all
countries which are not listed.
Since mere use of “disclaimers” should not shield users of signs
on the Internet from every liability, the item invites the competent authority to inquire whether the
user has adhered to his stated intent.
It is recalled that “location” is used in a purely factual way,
and does not require any continuous presence in the Member State, such as the term “domicile”
(see Note 3.04 above).
3.06 As currently drafted, “disclaimers” constitute merely one factor among other factors which
a competent authority can consider for determining whether the use of a sign on the Internet has
produced a commercial effect in the Member State concerned.
The use of “disclaimers” can,
therefore, be outweighed by other factors, such as actual delivery of goods to customers located
in the Member State.
A competent authority can also hold, for example, that a disclaimer was not
effective in an individual case because it was not drafted clearly enough, because it was not
placed obviously enough, or because it was written in a language that is not understood in the
Member State in question.
In sum, the determination as to whether a disclaimer is effective or
not is ultimately left to competent authorities of Member States.
3.07 The concept of disclaimer used in item (ii) of Article 3 is broader than the one used in
Article 12.  In Article 3, the statement serves as a precautionary measure by a user who does not
necessarily own a right in the sign he uses, and who does not necessarily know of any other
existing rights.
This could be one way of reducing the need to do a “global search” for existing
rights, which is often difficult and prohibitively expensive.
In item (ii) of Article 3, the effectiveness
of the disclaimer is left to the appreciation of competent authorities in each individual case.
In
Article 12, however, the disclaimer serves as a means for users in good faith, who own a right in
the sign they use, to avoid liability for the infringement of a particular right, after having been
notified by the owner of that right.
Article 12 therefore explicitly requires that the disclaimer also
contain a statement designed to avoid confusion with the holder of the allegedly infringed right.
Article 12 further sets out, in items (iii) and (iv), the specific actions the user must take in order to
abide by the disclaimer.
Under these circumstances, the disclaimer can effectively shield the
user from liability.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 19
3.08 Items (iii) and (iv).
These items appear self-explanatory
3.09 Subparagraph (c).
This subparagraph invites a competent authority to determine whether
the goods or services offered in conjunction with the use of the sign on the Internet relate or can
relate to a particular Member State.
Again, this does not mean that use of a sign on the Internet
can only have a commercial effect in a particular Member State if it takes place in conjunction
with the offer of goods or services over the Internet.
As in the example of advertisement targeted
at a particular Member State, use of a sign on the Internet can have a commercial effect in a
particular Member State without any goods or services being offered over the Internet.
3.10 Item (i).
This item refers to national laws which set conditions for the marketing of
particular goods or services, such as product regulations.
Use of a sign on the Internet in
conjunction with the offer of goods or services that do not comply with the product regulations of
a particular Member State is less likely to produce a commercial effect in that Member State
because, in such a case, the goods or services could not lawfully be delivered in that State.
3.11 Item (ii) This item appears self-explanatory.
3.12 Subparagraph (d).
This subparagraph directs the attention of competent authorities to
the manner of use of the sign on the Internet.
A sign can be used on a web site, in an e-mail or
an e-mail heading.
It can also be used to direct Internet users to a particular web site, for
example if it is used in an Internet domain name or as a meta-tag without being visible on the
web site itself.
It should be noted, however, that a sign can be used on the Internet without there
being a web site on which or for which it is used.
Therefore, the item does not explicitly mention
any specific forms of uses.
3.13 Items (i) and (ii).
These items include all means which enable Internet users located in a
particular country to communicate with the user of the sign in question.
In addition to an address
or telephone number in the Member State (item (ii)) which provide an obvious relationship with
that State, a web site can offer means of interactive contact which allow customers located in the
Member State not only to communicate with the user via e-mail, but also to place orders or to
obtain delivery directly via the Internet.
Similarly, if the sign was used in an e-mail which was
sent to (potential) customers in the Member State, the recipients could directly reply to that e-
mail, and thus easily communicate with the user of the sign.
Thus, the “degree of interactivity” of
the use can be an important factor for determining a commercial effect.
3.14 Item (iii).
Top level domain names based on the ISO Standard country code 3166 refer to
individual States.
For example, “.ch” refers to Switzerland, “.fr” to France and “.ru” refers to the
Russian Federation.
If a domain name, which identifies a web site or an e-mail address, is
registered in a top level domain referring to a particular country, this might indicate that use of the
sign as part of, or in conjunction with, that domain name is in some way connected to that
country.
3.15 Item (iv).
Language can be a decisive factor if the language used in conjunction with the
use of the sign is not widely spoken outside the Member State in question.
However, the more
widely a language is used outside the Member State, the less conclusive is the evidence
provided by its use.
3.16 Item (v).
It should be noted that the fact alone that a particular Internet location, such as
a web site, has been visited by Internet users located in a particular Member State may not
suffice for concluding that use of a sign on that Internet location has a commercial effect in that
Member State.
Even though such visits will probably not be conclusive as such, they can
nevertheless constitute one factor among others for determining whether the use of a sign on the
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 20
Internet has a commercial effect in that country.
It is recalled that the term “location” is used in a
purely factual way, and does not require any continuous presence in the Member State, such as
the term “domicile” (see Note 3.04 above).
3.17 Subparagraph (e).
This subparagraph highlights the importance of any right in the sign
used.  Use of a sign on the Internet can have a commercial effect in a Member State if the sign is
the subject of a right protected under the law of that Member State.
This link between the sign
used and a right in that sign can become relevant in two situations: First, in a positive way
(item (i)), if the user himself owns a right in the sign.
If the user has, for example, registered a
mark in a particular Member State, this can serve as an indication that he or she intends to
engage in activities which have a commercial effect in that State.
Second, in a negative way
(item (ii)), if someone else owns a right in the sign under the law of a particular Member State.
If
the user, knowing of that right, nevertheless uses the sign, for example because he or she wants
to profit from the goodwill embodied in that sign, such use can have a commercial effect in the
State in which the right is protected, be it only because the commercial value of the sign for the
right holder is diminished.
Such use is generally considered to be use in “bad faith.”
“Cybersquatting” would be the most obvious case of such unauthorized use.
Thus, item (ii)
would allow a competent authority to find a link between such cases of bad faith use, and the
country in which the infringed right is protected.
In order to clarify that item (ii) refers to the effect
of bad faith use, it follows the wording of Article 4(2)(ii).
3.18 Paragraph (2).
This provision states expressly that the list of factors is neither cumulative
nor exhaustive, but functions as a checklist of factors which might be relevant in a given case,
without obliging the competent authority to express an opinion about every listed factor.
Paragraph (2) follows the model of Article 2(1)(c) of the Joint Recommendation Concerning
Provisions on the Protection of Well-Known Marks.
Notes on Article 4
4.01 It should be noted that Article 4 does not introduce bad faith as a prerequisite of liability
for infringement.
However, since use of a sign on the Internet in bad faith is relevant in the
context of Article 9 and 15, it is necessary to include a provision describing this concept in Part II
which deals with use of a sign in the Internet in a general way.
4.02 Paragraph (1).
This provision requires competent authorities to consider all relevant
circumstances when determining bad faith.
A competent authority will determine bad faith in
accordance with the applicable law.
Accordingly, for determining whether a right has been
acquired in bad faith, the law under which the right has been acquired will have to be applied,
whereas the question whether a sign was used in bad faith can be determined under the law of
the State in which the sign was used.
4.03 Paragraph (2).
This provision sets out, by way of example, the factors that appear
particularly relevant in the context of the determination under paragraph (1).
Member States are,
however, free to adopt different standards for determining bad faith.
The factors are stated in an
abstract and general way.
A more detailed list of factors could only provide examples for “unfair
advantage” or “unjustifiable impairment,” such as those which are included in the Report of the
WIPO Internet Domain Name Process (paragraph 172).
Such a list might, however, rather be
perceived as a limitation of relevant factors.
A more general formulation chosen in the present
provisions allows competent authorities of Member States to adapt their reasoning to the merits
of each individual case.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 21
4.04 Item (i).
This item specifies that users must have had knowledge of the conflicting right at
the time when they acquired the right or started to use the sign.
If a user later becomes aware of
a conflicting right, he would not be considered to have acted in bad faith.
The expression “could
not have reasonably been unaware” is used instead of the term “reason to know” in order to
avoid the inclusion of broad constructive knowledge provisions under certain national laws.
A
similar provision is contained in Article 4(5)(c) of the Joint Recommendation Concerning
Provisions on the Protection of Well-Known Marks.
It should be noted that knowledge, or the fact
that the user could not reasonably have been unaware of the conflicting right, alone, would not be
sufficient for a finding of bad faith.
4.05 Item (ii).
This item introduces an additional element of bad faith, namely that the sign
was used with a view to profit from the goodwill associated with the sign protected by the right of
another, or to impair its distinctive character or reputation.
However, because of the difficulty of
proving a certain intent, an objective formulation has been adopted.
Notes on Article 5
5.01 This provision confirms that use of a sign on the Internet shall be taken into consideration
for determining whether rights in the sign have been acquired or maintained through use in a
particular Member State.
Instances in which a right can be acquired or maintained through use
include, inter alia: acquiring or maintaining a right in an unregistered mark or other sign;
acquiring or maintaining the registration of a mark; avoiding abandonment of a right;
determining whether a mark has acquired distinctiveness; or determining whether a mark has
become well-known.
If relevant under the applicable law, use of a sign on the Internet by another
can also be considered as prior use of a sign in that Member State.
5.02 The provision does not require Member States to provide the legal possibilities for
acquiring or maintaining rights in marks or other industrial property rights in signs through use.
However, if use of a sign is relevant in these contexts under the law of a Member State, use on
the Internet shall also be taken into account, provided that such use can be deemed to have
taken place in that Member State (see Article 2).
It should be noted that the provision does not
specify the legal requirements for acquiring or maintaining a right in a sign through its use.
This
determination is left to the applicable law.
Article 5 merely requires that use of a sign on the
Internet that has a commercial effect in a Member State be subject to the same general
principles as use in that Member State outside the Internet.
5.03 The provision also reminds competent authorities that “new” forms of use should not be
discarded only because they are new.
However, the final determination as to whether a
particular “new” form of use can be taken into account for the purposes of acquiring or
maintaining a right is left to the applicable law.
Notes on Article 6
6.01 Mere use of a sign on the Internet shall not be considered as infringing any rights in that
sign which might exist under the law of a particular Member State.
Use on the Internet shall only
be taken into consideration under the laws of a particular Member State if such use has a
commercial effect and can, therefore, be deemed to have taken place in that Member State (see
Articles 2 and 3).
6.02 The present provisions also address matters of unfair competition on the Internet.
They
are, however, limited to the question as to when and under what conditions use of a sign on the
Internet can constitute an act of unfair competition in Member States.
Consistent with the
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 22
approach generally adopted in the present provisions, the substantive criteria for determining that
use of a sign on the Internet constitutes an act of unfair competition in an individual case are left
to the applicable law of Member States.
Such an approach is also mandated by the fact that the
private international law rules of unfair competition have not been harmonized.
Therefore, the
present provisions merely provide that use of a sign on the Internet shall only be considered as
an act of unfair competition under the law of a Member State, if such use has a commercial effect
in a particular Member State.
6.03 Article 6 also requires Member States to protect rights in marks and other signs in
situations which might appear unusual if compared with forms of use outside the Internet, such
as use of signs in banner advertisements, sale or purchase of signs as keywords for search
engines, use as metatags, use in Uniform Resource Locators (URLs), use as search terms, or
any other “new” forms of use that might be possible in the future.
6.04 It should be noted, however, that Article 6 does not require Member States to consider
such forms of use as generally infringing marks or other industrial property rights in signs.
Whether an infringement has in effect taken place will be determined under the applicable law,
including any exceptions which might apply in certain situations, such as “fair use” of descriptive
terms (see Article 8).
Article 6 in effect obliges Member States to monitor new and emerging,
possibly circumventive, forms of use, and to provide protection under their national laws.
This
protection may be provided under any of the laws relating to marks or other industrial property
rights in signs, including unfair competition laws, of the Member State, at the Member State’s
option.
Notes on Article 7
7.01 This provision states the general principle that the user of a sign on the Internet shall,
under the applicable law on distinctive signs or unfair competition of a Member State, be liable for
such use which constitutes an infringement or an act of unfair competition if use of the sign on
the Internet can be deemed to have taken place in that Member State in accordance with
Sections 2 and 6.
The only exceptions to that principle are provided for by Section 8 (Exceptions
and Limitations under the applicable law) and contained in Part V (Notice and Avoidance of
Conflict).
7.02 The provision does not specify the conditions for determining whether such use in fact
infringes a right which is protected under the law of a particular Member State, or whether it
constitutes an act of unfair competition.
This determination has to be made under the applicable
law of that Member State.
Similarly, liability of intermediaries, such as online service providers, is
not specifically addressed under these provisions, but left to the applicable law.
Notes on Article 8
8.01 This provision generally requires Member States to apply any existing exceptions and
limitations under the applicable law in respect of liability that arises in connection with the use of
a sign on the Internet, provided, of course, that the use on the Internet can be considered to have
taken place in the Member State in question in accordance with Section 2.
This means that all
exceptions to liability or limitations to the scope of rights existing under the law applicable in that
Member State have to be available to users of a sign on the Internet.
However, the provision
neither obliges Member States to recognize particular exceptions or limitations, such as “fair use”
or “free speech,” nor requires them to introduce particular exceptions or limitations for use of
signs on the Internet.
It is left to the applicable law to determine the forms of use that could
benefit from an exception or limitation.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 23
Notes on Article 9
9.01 Because of the territoriality of marks and other industrial property rights in signs, different
owners can hold rights in identical or similar signs in different countries.
This can create
problems if the sign is used on the Internet.
Because of the necessarily global nature of the
Internet such use might be considered as infringing a right under the law of a Member State in
which the right of the user is not recognized.
Similar conflicts arise when the use of a sign is
permitted in one country, but is considered to infringe the right of someone else under the law of
another country.
9.02 Part V provides for what might be called a “notice and avoidance of conflict” procedure in
an attempt to balance the interests of good faith legitimate users who hold a right in the sign they
use or are otherwise permitted to use that sign on the one hand, and owners of rights which
might be infringed by such use on the other.
It also implements the general principle that no one
should be obliged to undertake a worldwide search for registered or unregistered rights before
using a sign on the Internet.
Right holders, or persons who are otherwise permitted to use the
sign, are exempt from liability up to the point when they receive a notification of infringement
provided that they use the sign in good faith, and provide in conjunction with the use of the sign
on the Internet, sufficient information to be contacted.
As a consequence, they cannot be
subjected to any injunction, or held liable for any damages occurring, before notification.
Such
users are, therefore, not compelled to undertake a worldwide search for existing rights before
using the sign on the Internet.
However, once they have received a notice of infringement, they
have to take certain measures for avoiding or ending the conflict.
If they do so, they are not only
exempt from any liability for any infringing use prior to notification, but continue to be exempt for
any such use after notification.
9.03 Articles 9 to 12 do not apply to cases where the use of a sign on the Internet is
considered an act of unfair competition in a Member State.
In most cases of unfair competition,
there is no clearly specified right holder who could start the “notice and avoidance of conflict”
procedure by sending a notification.
The unfair competition laws of individual countries diverge
widely with regard to the question who has standing to bring an action in unfair competition.
It
should be noted, however, that nothing would prevent a Member State from applying the “notice
and avoidance of conflict” procedure to acts of unfair competition as well.
9.04 Article 9 exempts users of signs on the Internet from liability for the infringement of a right
up to the point of notification, provided that all conditions listed in items (i) to (iii) are met.
The
provision is, of course, only applicable when the use on the Internet has a commercial effect in
the Member State where the allegedly infringed right is protected, as set out in Articles 2, 3
and 6, because otherwise the user could not be held liable.
It should be noted that the “notice
and avoidance of conflict” procedure does not result in a permanent restriction or limitation of
rights that are infringed by the use of a sign on the Internet; liability for infringement begins with
the notification if the user does not comply with the requirements set out in Articles 10 to 12..
Nothing in this provision shall derogate from the existing obligations that Member States may
have to each other under existing international conventions and agreements concerning industrial
property.
9.05 Item (i) Only users who own a right in the sign in another Member State, users who use
the sign with the consent of the owner, or users who are otherwise permitted to use the sign can
benefit from that procedure.
9.06 The phrase “otherwise permitted to use the sign” is understood to refer to:
(i) the use of the sign by a user who has a right in that sign which is, like his personal name,
protected in a non-commercial context;
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 24
(ii) the fair use of generic or descriptive terms.
Member States may also apply the “notice and avoidance of conflict” procedure if the use is
permitted in another Member State for other reasons or simply because no other person owns a
right in the sign in that other Member State.
9.07 The term “close connection” describes a certain relationship between the user of the sign
and the Member State under the laws of which he is permitted to use the sign.
Such a
relationship is obvious in cases where the user owns a right in that sign under the laws of a
particular Member State.
If the user, however, does not own a right in the sign, he should not be
able to rely on the laws of a country with which he has no relationship whatsoever for asserting
that his use was permitted.
He should have valid reasons for this assertion, which would have to
be based on his relationship with a country that permits the use.
Domicility would satisfy this
requirement.  Since the present provisions are concerned with use which has a commercial
effect, the “close connection” would typically be of a commercial nature.
Obvious examples for
such a “close connection” would be the relationship with a country in which the user has his seat
or headquarters, or a real and effective industrial or commercial establishment in the sense of
Article 3 of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.
The user would also
have a “close connection” with a country in which he carries out a substantial part of his
business.
9.08 Item (ii) The exception from liability does not apply if the user has acquired or used the
right in bad faith.
The criteria for determining whether a right was acquired or used in bad faith
are set out in Article 4.
9.09 Item (iii) The user can only be notified if he has provided sufficient contact information in
conjunction with the use.
If he fails to do so, he can be held liable for any infringement even
without having received a notification of infringement.
Notes on Article 10
10.01 Article 10 sets out the consequences of an effective notification.
After notification, the
user of a sign on the Internet only continues to be exempt from liability if he substantiates his own
right in the sign, or spells out why he is permitted to use the sign, in accordance with items (i) and
(ii), and, in addition to this substantiation, takes the measures set out in item (iii).
The time period
within which the user has to act is not specified because the time to implement the measures
might be different in each individual case.
However, the user has to act “expeditiously,” which
means that he or she has to act as quickly as possible under the given circumstances.
10.02 In item (iii), the measures are described only with reference to their objective, namely, to
avoid a commercial effect in the Member State in which the allegedly infringed right is protected,
or to avoid infringement of that right through other means..
The user can, however, only be
expected to take “reasonable” measures.
Such measures should not unreasonably burden the
commercial activity the user carries out over the Internet.
Thus, the user should not be obliged,
for example, to stop every activity on the Internet which would, of course, be the most effective
way of avoiding a commercial effect in any given country (see also Article 15 for remedies).
The
parties to the conflict are free to determine which measures would achieve these objectives in a
given case.  They are, of course, free to have recourse to alternative dispute resolution
procedures, but are not obliged to do so.
If the user adopts certain measures unilaterally, the
competent authority, which is called upon to decide whether the user can be held liable for the
infringement of the other right, will have to decide whether the measures adopted by the user are
sufficient.  Member States are, however, obliged to accept the measure set out in Article 12 as
sufficient under Article 10.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 25
Notes on Article 11
11.01 Article 11 sets out the requirements under which a notification has the effect described in
Article 10.  The owner of the allegedly infringed right has to enable the user to assess the case
and to respond to the notification.
Therefore, the owner of the allegedly infringed right has to
present a prima facie case of infringement (items (i), (iii) to (v)), and to furnish sufficient contact
information (item (ii)).
If the notification fails any of the requirements listed in items (i) to (v), it
shall not be considered effective and the user continues to be exempt from liability.
Whether the
notification becomes effective once it has been sent or only on receipt is, however, left to the
applicable law.
11.02 The notification can also be sent by a person other than the owner if the sender acts as
the “representative” of the owner.
The term “representative” includes every person that is
authorized under the applicable law (i.e. the law under which the right is protected) to take steps
for enforcing the right.
Thus, the term can also include a licensee having this authority under the
applicable law.
11.03 The notification has to be sent by mail, e-mail or telefacsimile.
This requirement ensures
that the required information exists in, or, as in the case of e-mail, can be reduced to, a physical
embodiment.  Oral notification by telephone or the like would thus not be sufficient.
11.04 The notification has to be drafted in the language, or in one of the languages, used in
conjunction with the sign on the Internet.
This requirement seems justified in view of the fact that
the user of the sign has to act under time pressure under paragraph (2), and must therefore be in
a position to understand the notification.
Notes on Article 12
12.01 This provision is meant to give right holders, and other permitted users, who use their
sign on the Internet in good faith, some degree of legal certainty as to how to avoid liability for the
infringement of another right after having received a notification of infringement.
The effect of
Article 12 is that such users cannot be held liable for the infringement of the other right provided
that they fulfill all the requirements set out in Article 12.
Hence, a disclaimer under Article 12, has
to be accepted as an effective measure described in Article 10(iii), and can, therefore, shield right
owners and other permitted users from liability.
12.02 The disclaimer has to include the two statements listed in item (i) in order to avoid
confusion with the owner of the conflicting right, and to avoid a commercial effect in the Member
State in which the other right is protected.
The user also has to take certain qualified actions in
order to render the disclaimer effective under Article 10 (item (iii)).
12.03 The statements listed in item (i) have to appear “in conjunction” with the use of the sign.
If the sign is used on a web site, the statement would have to appear on that web site.
The
provisions do not address further details, such as the exact location or the size of the statements,
or whether it would suffice to place a link on the relevant page which leads to the statements.
This determination is left to the competent authorities of Member States.
12.04 Item (i).
Once users have received a notification of conflict, they can be expected to
make the statements set out in item (i), in order to avoid confusion with the owner of the other
right on the one hand, and to avoid a commercial effect with a particular Member State on the
other.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 26
12.05 Item (ii).
The user should be able to remove the commercial effect caused by his use in
one language, and to avoid liability for infringement, by making the prescribed statements in the
same language.
12.06 Item (iii) and (iv).
The disclaimer is only effective under Article 10 if the user abides by it
as described in items (iii) and (iv).
This procedure should, however, not unreasonably burden his
commercial activity.
The user should, therefore, not be expected to verify the statements made
by his customers.
If the goods or services are physically delivered, it is in the own interest of
customers to indicate their address correctly.
If payments are effected via credit card, most
companies require a billing address.
If, however, the goods or services are directly delivered
over the Internet, a business has in most cases no means to find out, in the normal course of
business, where their customers are really located.
In line with the rationale that the user should
only be required to take measures which do not unreasonably burden his or her commercial
activity, it seems justified to pose the remaining risk of false indications on the owner of the other
right, that is the right which is alleged to be infringed.
It is recalled that the term “location” is used
in a purely factual way, and does not require any continuous presence in the country, such as the
term “domicile” (see Note 3.04 above).
12.07 Unlike Article 14, Article 12 does not mention “gateway web pages.”
The reason for this
is that Article 12 describes measures which a user can take unilaterally in order to avoid liability.
The establishment of gateway pages, however, would require consent of all parties involved.
Gateway web pages can, of course, be adopted under Article 10 by way of consent between the
user and the owner of the allegedly infringed right, but not as a unilateral measure of the user.
12.08 Article 12 is part of the “notice and avoidance of conflict” procedure set out in Articles 9
to 11.  As a consequence, right owners and other permitted users, who use their sign in good
faith, can only rely on a disclaimer in the context of this procedure, i.e. once they have received a
notification of infringement as set out in Articles 10 and 11.
It should be noted, however, that a
right owner or other permitted user in good faith, who is aware of another right without having
been notified, would probably not produce a commercial effect under Article 2 if he takes all the
measures set out in Article 12, and could, therefore, not be held liable for the infringement of that
right.  This would, however, have to be decided by a competent authority in the individual case.
Notes on Article 13
13.01 This provision emphasizes the necessity to adapt national or regional laws on remedies
to infringements taking place on the Internet, and to take account of the fact that marks and other
industrial property rights in signs, as well as the means for enforcing these rights, are territorial in
nature, whereas the Internet is global.
The same is generally true for the laws against unfair
competition which apply only to acts which affect the market of a certain country.
Such laws
cannot claim authority over acts occurring in foreign countries.
Thus, by being linked to certain
national markets, unfair competition laws are also territorially limited.
13.02 Paragraph (1).
In principle, a decision as to remedies should take into account the
territorial limitation of marks or other industrial property rights in signs.
Remedies should,
therefore, be limited, as far as possible, to the territory in which the right is recognized, and they
should only be available if the allegedly infringing use of the sign can be deemed to have taken
place in that territory (see Article 6).
This is determined with regard to the “commercial effect” of
such use in the Member State in question (see Articles 2 and 3).
Thus, the “commercial effect” of
Internet use should serve as a yardstick for determining a “proportionate” remedy.
Use of a sign
on the Internet that infringes a right which is protected under the laws of a Member State should
not be prohibited any more than is proportionate to the commercial effect that such use has
produced in that Member State.
Injunctions should generally be limited to what is necessary to
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 27
prevent or remove the commercial effect in the Member State in which the infringed right is
protected, and damages should be granted only for the commercial effect of the use in that
Member State.
13.03 Similarly, remedies for acts of unfair competition should only be granted if the allegedly
unfair use on the Internet can be deemed to have occurred in the Member State concerned
(Article 6), and they should be limited as far as possible to removing the commercial effect from
the Member State in which the unfair competition law applies.
13.04 Paragraph (2) emphasizes the need for a balanced approach.
In addition to the interests
of the parties involved, a competent authority could also take account, inter alia, of the number of
Member States in which the infringed right is also protected, the number of Member States in
which the infringing sign is protected by a right, or the relative extent of use on the Internet.
13.05 Paragraph (3).
The user of the sign might, in a given case, be in a position to propose a
remedy which is equally (or more) effective as the remedy envisaged by the competent authority,
but less burdensome for him.
Thus, a defendant should, in an infringement procedure, have the
right to propose a remedy.
This does not mean, however, that the competent authority is obliged
to ask the defendant for proposals; paragraph (3) is a mere application of the principle that
defendants have a right to be heard before a decision on the merits is taken.
This is emphasized
by the words “upon request”.
The final decision at the end of the infringement procedure is, of
course, left to the competent authority.
Furthermore, the provision does not interfere with the
authority of courts or other competent authorities under the applicable law to order provisional
measures without hearing the other party (inaudita altera parte); the right to be heard can be
given at a later stage in the proceedings before a decision on the merits is taken.
Notes on Article 14
14.01 This provision further specifies the general principle of proportionality contained in
Article 13.  Under normal circumstances, remedies should not have the effect of forcing the user
of a sign on the Internet to abandon any use of that sign on the Internet because the right, or the
law against unfair competition, which they are meant to enforce is territorially limited.
14.02 Paragraph (1) For this reason, paragraph (1) requires competent authorities, in designing
remedies, to consider limitations of use designed to avoid a commercial effect in the Member
State in which the infringed right is protected, or in which the law against unfair competition
applies.  If there is not commercial effect, the user can no longer be considered to infringe a right
or to commit an act of unfair competition in that Member State (Article 6).
The competent
authority can also order the user to avoid the infringement or the act of unfair competition in the
Member State by other means.
These objectives mirror the ones listed in item (iii) of Article 10.
The situation is, however, different: Whereas Articles 9 to 12 deal with measures that right
owners in good faith can adopt to avoid liability for the infringement of another right, Article 14
addresses a situation in which a court has already found an infringement or an act of unfair
competition and is now determining a proportionate remedy.
14.03 Paragraph (2) gives examples for proportionate limitations of use.
Unlike Article 12,
Article 14(2) does not require a competent authority to adopt one or all of the measures listed.
Competent authorities are free to choose other remedies which are effective and proportionate in
a given case.
SCT/24/4
Annex II, page 28
14.04 Subparagraphs (a) to (c) mirror the disclaimer described under Article 12, but in this case
the disclaimer is imposed by way of an injunction.
In such a case, the competent authority is free
to determine the language of the disclaimer, and to take account of laws regulating the use of
languages by official authorities.
14.05 Subparagraph (d) proposes an alternative measure which has already successfully been
applied in practice: owners of mutually infringing rights could be required either to set up a
gateway page through which the web site of both right holders could be accessed, or to provide
links from one web site to the other.
Notes on Article 15
15.01 Paragraph (1).
This provision contains another implementation of the general principle of
proportionality set out in Article 13.
An injunction to cease every use of a sign on the Internet
would go far beyond the territory for which the infringed right in that sign has effect.
It would have
an effect which is as global as the Internet and could, therefore, also be called a “global
injunction.”  Applying the principle of proportionality, therefore, means that competent authorities
should, as far as possible, refrain from granting such “global injunctions.”
However, the provision
does not completely exclude prohibitions of use, which can be justified particularly in cases of
bad-faith use, such as cybersquatting.
The provision does, therefore, not interfere with national
anti-cyberquatting laws which provide for prohibitions of use in such cases of use in bad faith.
15.02 Paragraph (2).
This provision generally exempts users from “global injunctions” if they do
not act in bad faith as described in Article 4, and if they either hold a right in that sign themselves,
or are otherwise permitted to use the sign on the Internet in the way they use it.
It should be
noted that the concept of “permitted use” in Article 15 is wider than the one in Article 9.
In
Article 9, “permitted use” is limited to the fair use of generic or descriptive terms, and to use
which is supported by a non-commercial right such as a personal name (see Note 9.06 above).
For the purpose of applying Article 15, however, no such limitation exists.
Under this provision,
there are many additional reasons why users might be permitted to use a sign in a particular way
even if they do not own a right in it as defined in Article 1(ii); the user might, for example, be
permitted to use the sign simply because no other person owns a right in it.
If his use is merely
permitted, the user could not rely on Articles 9 to 12 in order to avoid liability for the infringement
of rights protected under the laws of other countries.
The effect of paragraph (2) is that, in cases
of permitted good-faith use, a competent authority can only apply limitations of use, such as
those described in Article 14.
[Annex III follows]
SCT/24/4
ANNEX III
E
WO/GA/39/10
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH
DATE: JULY 20, 2010
WIPO General Assembly
Thirty-Ninth (20th Extraordinary) Session
Geneva, September 20 to 29, 2010
Internet Domain Names
prepared by the Secretariat
1.  The Internet Domain Name System (DNS) raises a number of challenges for the
protection of intellectual property, which, due to the global nature of the Internet, call for
an international approach.
WIPO has addressed these challenges since 1998 by
developing specific solutions, most notably in the First1 and Second2 WIPO Internet
Domain Name Processes.
In particular, the WIPO Arbitration and Mediation Center
(WIPO Center) provides trademark owners with an efficient international mechanism to
deal with the bad-faith registration and use of domain names corresponding to their
trademark rights.
2.  This document provides an update on the domain name-related activities of WIPO, as
previously reported in WO/GA/38/123.
It covers the WIPO Center’s administration of
domain name disputes under different policies and various related aspects of the DNS,
as well as selected policy developments, in particular the introduction of new generic
1 The Management of Internet Names and Addresses: Intellectual Property Issues – Final Report of the First WIPO
Internet Domain Name Process, WIPO publication No. 439, also available at
http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/processes/process1/report.
2 The Recognition of Rights and the Use of Names in the Internet Domain Name System – Report of the Second
WIPO Internet Domain Name Process, WIPO Publication No. 843, also available at
http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/processes/process2/report.
3 http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/govbody/en/wo_ga_38/wo_ga_38_12.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 2
top-level domains (gTLDs), internationalized domain names (IDNs), and the status of the
recommendations made by the Member States of WIPO in the context of the Second
WIPO Internet Domain Name Process.
I.  DOMAIN NAME CASE ADMINISTRATION
A.  Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy
3.  The WIPO Center administers dispute resolution procedures principally under the
Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP).
The UDRP was adopted by
the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) on the basis of
recommendations made by WIPO in the First WIPO Internet Domain Name Process.
The
UDRP is limited to clear cases of bad-faith, abusive registration and use of domain
names.  It does not prevent either party from submitting a dispute to a competent court of
justice.  However, the UDRP has proven highly popular among trademark owners, and
very few cases that were decided under the UDRP were also brought before a national
court of justice4.
4.  Since December 1999, the WIPO Center has administered more than 17,500 UDRP and
UDRP-based cases.
Demand for WIPO’s domain name dispute resolution services
continued in 2009 with trademark holders filing 2,107 complaints.
While this caseload
represents a 9.5% decrease over 2008, it covers the highest number of individual domain
names in a given year (4,688) since the UDRP was launched ten years ago.
Following
the introduction by WIPO of its paperless UDRP procedure in December 2009, the first
five months of 2010 have seen an increase of some 20% in cases filed compared to the
same period in 2009.
5.  A diverse mixture of individuals and enterprises, foundations and institutions used the
WIPO Center’s dispute resolution procedures in 2009.
The top five sectors for
complainant business activity were Biotechnology and Pharmaceuticals, Banking and
Finance, Internet and IT, Retail, and Food, Beverage and Restaurants.
Pharmaceutical
manufacturers remained the top filers due to numerous permutations of protected names
registered for web sites offering or linking to online sales of medications and drugs.
WIPO UDRP proceedings have so far involved parties from 155 countries.
Reflecting the
truly global scope of this dispute mechanism, in 2009 alone, named parties to WIPO
cases represented over 110 countries.
WIPO UDRP proceedings have so far been
conducted in 18 different languages, namely (in alphabetical order), Chinese, Danish,
Dutch, English, French, German, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Polish,
Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish in function of the language
of the applicable registration agreement of the domain name at issue.
6.  Since the year 2000 all panel decisions are posted on the WIPO Center’s website.
To facilitate access to these decisions according to subject matter the WIPO Center also
offers an online searchable Legal Index5.
This Index has become a highly-frequented
professional resource, allowing panelists, parties, academics or any interested person to
familiarize themselves with WIPO case precedent, and is one of the Organization’s most
4 See Selected UDRP-related Court Cases at http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/domains/challenged.
5 The WIPO Legal Index is available at the Center’s web site at
http://www.wipo.int/cgi-bin/domains/search/legalindex.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 3
visited web pages.
The Index is updated periodically to include new search categories
that primarily reflect developments in the Domain Name System itself6.
In addition to its
Legal Index, the WIPO Center also offers an overview of broad decision trends on
important case issues, via the WIPO Overview of WIPO Panel Views on Selected UDRP
Questions which distills thousands of UDRP cases handled by the WIPO Center.
The Overview is a globally used instrument to help maintain the consistency of WIPO
UDRP jurisprudence.7
7.  The WIPO Center also maintains on its web pages an extended statistics search facility
in relation to WIPO domain name dispute resolution, intended to assist WIPO case
parties and neutrals, trademark attorneys, domain name policy makers, the media and
academics.  Available statistics cover many categories, such as “areas of complainant
activity”, “named respondents”, “domain name script” and “25 most cited decisions in
complaint8”.
8.  In addition, the WIPO Center regularly organizes Domain Name Dispute Resolution
Workshops for interested parties9 and meetings of its Domain Name Panelists.
The year 2009 marked the tenth anniversary of the introduction of the UDRP and in
recognition of this milestone the WIPO Center turned its annual Panelists Meeting into an
open Conference, “10 Years UDRP – What’s Next?”.
This Conference drew lessons from
the UDRP experience of the WIPO Center, panelists, parties, and other stakeholders,
with a view to informing similar or other processes in the future of the DNS and in the
broader context of intellectual property, and exemplifies the WIPO Center’s commitment
to monitoring and guiding developments in the DNS10.
B.  Country Code Top-Level Domains
9.  While the mandatory application of the UDRP is limited to domain names registered in
gTLDs, such as .biz, .com, .info, .net, and .org, the WIPO Center also assists many
ccTLD registries in their establishment of registration conditions and dispute resolution
procedures that conform with international standards of intellectual property protection.
These procedures are mostly modeled after the UDRP, but may take account of the
particular circumstances and needs of individual ccTLDs.
Following further additions
during the past 12 months, the WIPO Center provides domain name dispute resolution
services to 62 ccTLD registries11.
In line with a global increase in the share of ccTLD
registrations in recent years, the collective percentage of disputed ccTLD domain names
in WIPO cases has been increasing, from less than 1% in the year 2000, to 7% in 2007,
and 14% in 2009.
The growth in demand for dispute resolution services among the
ccTLD registries reflects the expansion of the Internet across regions.
6 Most recently added Index categories include: Timing of Rights; Pay-per-click and other landing pages; Prior
knowledge/Notice of Mark; Willful blindness; Constructive notice; Knew of should have known; Registrant
search obligation; and, Consent to transfer.
7 The Overview is available at the Center’s web site at http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/domains/search/overview.
8 The portal page of this facility is located at http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/domains/statistics.
9 See the list of events organized by the Center at http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/events.
10 Program and presentations for this Conference are located at
http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/events/workshops/2009/10yrs-udrp/index.html.
11 The full list of ccTLDs which have retained the Center as domain name dispute resolution provider is available at
http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/domains/cctld.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 4
C.  WIPO “eUDRP” Implementation
10.  Following extensive research, the WIPO Center submitted a proposal to ICANN, in
December 2008, to remove the requirement to submit and distribute paper copies of
pleadings relating to the UDRP process, primarily through the use of email12.
This
forward-looking proposal emanated from awareness of environmental challenges and the
recognition that Internet-based communication has become ubiquitous.
Following ICANN
acceptance in October 2009, the WIPO Center became the first UDRP provider to offer
this electronic filing option from December 14, 2009, when amended WIPO practice took
effect.  WIPO’s eUDRP procedure benefits all stakeholders by eliminating the use of vast
quantities of paper and the associated production and shipping costs, as well as
improving the timeliness of UDRP proceedings without prejudicing either complainants or
respondents.
D.  UDRP Policy Development
11.  Significant developments in the DNS pose continuing challenges for intellectual property
rights owners, in particular trademark owners, in policing and enforcing their rights.
Such
developments include the growth in the number of professional domain name dealers and
the volume of their activity, and the use of computer software to automatically register
expired domain names and their “parking” on pay-per-click portal sites.
Domain names
used to be primarily identifiers for businesses and other Internet users, but are
increasingly taking on aspects of commodities for speculative gain.
Whereas traditionally
domain name abuse involved the registration of domain names by individuals seeking to
sell the “squatted” names, nowadays a growing number of “domainers” are deriving
income from the large-scale automated registration of domain names corresponding to
third-party identifiers.
12.  As the leading provider of case administration services under the UDRP, WIPO must
monitor these developments with a view to continually adjusting its practices.
One such
area of attention is the widespread use of privacy and proxy registration, which according
to some ICANN estimates involves 25% of domain name registrations.
In combination
with the reliability of “Whois” registrant contact data, this poses significant challenges for
filing parties, providers, and panels in ascertaining respondent identity in UDRP
proceedings.  A broader UDRP-related development which may present new concerns
for trademark owners is described in paragraph 31 herein.
II.  POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM
13.  Two policy developments in relation to ICANN will in particular present not only
opportunities but also serious legal and practical challenges for intellectual property rights
owners and users, namely the introduction of further new gTLDs and of IDNs at the top
level.
12 Full details of WIPO’s eUDRP implementation are available at http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/domains/rules/eudrp/.
http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/amc/en/docs/icann301208.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 5
A.  New Generic Top-Level Domains
14.  In September 2007, ICANN’s policy formulating body, the Generic Names Supporting
Organization (GNSO), issued a set of recommendations (GNSO New gTLD Report)13 to
ICANN to implement a process that allows for the introduction of further new gTLDs,
potentially broadly expanding their currently limited number14.
These GNSO
recommendations were approved by ICANN’s Board in June 2008 (ICANN’s New gTLD
Program)15.  Subsequently, ICANN published Versions I, II, III, and, on May 31, 2010, IV
of a Draft Applicant Guidebook for New gTLDs, containing information in relation to the
application process and conditions for New gTLDs16.
Informal communications as of
June 2010 suggest that a final Applicant Guidebook is expected to be published by
early 2011, in which case applications for new gTLDs could be received still in 2011 with
registrations of individual domain names following17.
15.  The GNSO New gTLD Report includes the following recommendation, of particular
relevance for trademark owners:
“Recommendation 3: Strings must not infringe the existing legal rights of others that are
recognized or enforceable under generally accepted and internationally recognized
principles of law.
Examples of these legal rights that are internationally recognized include, but are not
limited to, rights defined in the Paris Convention for the Protection of [Industrial] Property
(in particular trademark rights), the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) (in particular freedom of
expression rights).”
16.  On its part, ICANN’s Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC) issued in 2007 the “GAC
Principles regarding New gTLDs,” which state inter alia:
“2.3 The process for introducing new gTLDs must make proper allowance for prior third
party rights, in particular trademark rights as well as rights in the names and acronyms of
inter-governmental organizations (IGOs)18”.
17.  In its Press Release of March 23, 2010, providing an annual overview of the activities of
the WIPO Center, WIPO noted that ICANN’s New gTLD Program, forecasting an
unprecedented expansion of the DNS, is a source of concern for brand owners and
consumers19.  In this connection, the Final Report of the First WIPO Internet Domain
Name Process had recommended, inter alia, that new gTLDs be introduced in a
controlled manner.
Intellectual property stakeholders generally fear that in the absence
13 ICANN GNSO Final Report on the Introduction of New Generic Top Level Domains, at
http://gnso.icann.org/issues/new-gtlds/pdp-dec05-fr-parta-08aug07.htm.
14 There are currently 21 gTLDs, such as .com, .biz, and .net.
15 http://www.icann.org/en/announcements/announcement-4-26jun08-en.htm.
16 http://www.icann.org/en/topics/new-gtlds/draft-rfp-redline-28may10-en.pdf.
(Previous drafts were published respectively on October 24, 2008: http://www.icann.org/en/topics/new-gtlds/draft-
rfp-24oct08-en.pdf; February 18, 2009: http://www.icann.org/en/topics/new-gtlds/draft-rfp-clean-18feb09-en.pdf;
and, October 4, 2009: http://www.icann.org/en/topics/new-gtlds/draft-rfp-redline-04oct09-en.pdf.)
17 See generally, http://www.icann.org/en/topics/new-gtld-program.htm.
18 http://gac.icann.org/web/home/gTLD_principles.pdf.
19 http://www.wipo.int/pressroom/en/articles/2010/article_0007.html.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 6
of adequate safeguards, ICANN’s planned expansion will give rise to trademark abuse,
consumer confusion, and a general undermining of public trust in the DNS, with a heavier
enforcement burden on trademark owners.
18.  Based on these concerns, the WIPO Center has been working with stakeholders to
attempt to safeguard the observance of general principles of intellectual property
protection in the event that the introduction of new gTLDs will proceed as intended by
ICANN.  Within the framework of existing international trademark norms, the input of the
WIPO Center aims to help prevent disputes, and where such disputes arise, to create
administrative mechanisms as low-threshold alternatives to court litigation, in foreign
jurisdictions or otherwise.
(i) Pre- (TLD) Delegation Dispute Resolution Procedure
19.  In reply to ICANN’s request for “Expressions of Interest from Potential Dispute Resolution
Service Providers for New gTLD Program,” of December 21, 2007, the WIPO Center
communicated to ICANN in a letter dated January 18, 2008 its readiness to assist ICANN
in devising and applying dispute resolution procedures in relation to the introduction of
new gTLDs to the extent these involve disputes based on intellectual property rights.
Since then, the WIPO Center has worked with ICANN in the confirmation of the
substantive criteria of the pre-delegation procedure, which are rooted in the “WIPO Joint
Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Marks, and Other Industrial
Property Rights in Signs, on the Internet20”, adopted by the WIPO General Assembly in
September 2001, and the development of procedural rules for “Legal Rights Objections”
as integrated in ICANN’s Draft Applicant Guidebook21.
This proposal appears to have
met with broad support, and the WIPO Center has accepted to administer disputes under
these procedural rules22.
(ii) WIPO-Proposed Post- (TLD) Delegation Dispute Resolution Procedure
20.  From early 2008 the WIPO Center has advocated to ICANN the usefulness of a
permanent administrative option, additional to the procedure described in the preceding
paragraph, that would allow for the filing of a complaint with respect to an approved new
gTLD registry operator whose actual manner of operation or use of its registry is alleged
to cause or materially contribute to trademark abuse.
On February 5, 2009, the WIPO
Center communicated to ICANN a concrete substantive proposal for a trademark-based
post-delegation dispute resolution procedure addressing such potential gTLD registry
behavior.  This proposal, which was published in a letter from the WIPO Center to ICANN
dated March 13, 200923, is intended to act as a form of standardized assistance to
ICANN’s own compliance oversight responsibilities, provide an administrative alternative
to court litigation, encourage responsible conduct by relevant actors including through the
provision of safe harbors for good-faith registry operators, and enhance the security and
20 http://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/development_iplaw/pub845-toc.htm.
21 See section 3.2 of the Draft Applicant Guidebook Versions I, II, III, and IV.
22 See WIPO Rules for New gTLD Dispute Resolution and Schedule of Fees and Costs, respectively at
http://www.icann.org/en/topics/new-gtlds/draft-wipo-rules-28may10-en.pdf, and
http://www.icann.org/en/topics/new-gtlds/draft-wipo-fees-28may10-en.pdf.
23 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann130309.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 7
stability of the DNS.
The WIPO Center’s suggestion recognizes the opportunity which
ICANN and its registration stakeholders have, at this stage of planning, to incorporate
such a mechanism within their contractual framework, in a positive, pro-active manner
designed to minimize burdens associated with anticipated levels of infringement.
21.  Given the perceived convergence of registry, registrar, and registrant roles within the
DNS, the WIPO Center has further recommended, taking account of its UDRP-based
experiences, that ICANN consider extending the concept behind this post-delegation
proposal for registries also to registrar conduct24.
(iii) Complementary Rights Protection Mechanisms
22.  While the UDRP will remain an important curative tool for particular disputes involving the
considered transfer of a disputed domain name to the trademark owner, the WIPO Center
has also advocated the additional availability of other appropriate second-level Rights
Protection Mechanisms (RPMs) to safeguard legitimate trademark interests in the DNS.
Here again, the WIPO Center noted the need to strike a reasonable balance between the
protection of trademark rights recognized by law, the practical interests of good-faith
registration authorities to encounter minimal operational burdens, and the legitimate
expectations of bona fide domain name registrants.
With these interests in mind, the
WIPO Center on April 13, 2009, communicated to ICANN a discussion draft of an
Expedited (Domain Name) Suspension Mechanism (ESM)25.
This RPM would succinctly
address domain name disputes at the second (and lower) level, expanding the present
UDRP option for brand owners to combat cybersquatting in a cost and time effective
manner.
(iv) ICANN Implementation Recommendation Team; ICANN Special Trademarks
Issues Review Team
23.  In response to public comments made on ICANN’s Draft Applicant Guidebook, ICANN
defined trademark protection as an “overarching” issue requiring further consideration by
relevant parties, and ICANN’s Board resolved in March 6, 2009 to request the ICANN
Intellectual Property Constituency to convene an “Implementation Recommendation
Team” (IRT) to develop and propose solutions to the issue of trademark protection vis-à-
vis new gTLDs26.
24.  The IRT published its Draft27 and Final28 Reports respectively on April 24, and
May 29, 2009; these Reports distill and adapt a range of differing concepts and
proposals including the WIPO Center’s above-mentioned Post-Delegation and ESM
proposals.  The IRT recommendations included the creation of a central “Clearinghouse”
to collect and validate certain intellectual property rights and other data, and a “Globally
Protected Marks List” to reflect conditions deemed appropriate in the context of the DNS.
It appears that ICANN may be dropping this IRT concept of a formal “Globally Protected
marks List” from consideration.
24 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann260310rap.pdf; see also letters referenced at footnotes 29 and 30.
25 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann030409.pdf.
26 http://www.icann.org/en/minutes/resolutions-06mar09.htm#08.
27 http://www.icann.org/en/topics/new-gtlds/irt-draft-report-trademark-protection-24apr09-en.pdf.
28 http://www.icann.org/en/topics/new-gtlds/irt-final-report-trademark-protection-29may09-en.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 8
25.  The WIPO Center provided targeted comments on the Draft and Final IRT Reports
through in-person discussions and letters to ICANN and the IRT of May 1029, and
June 18, 200930.
These letters identified a number of aspects in which adaptations of the
WIPO Center’s Post-Delegation and ESM proposals may have the effect of limiting their
intended effectiveness.
While the IRT’s Final Report accounts for several of the key
trademark protection-based points raised by the WIPO Center, areas of concern
remained outstanding in particular as to independent and effective system design, both in
operational and in substantive terms.
26.  Subsequent to the Final IRT Report, ICANN through its staff further adapted the concept
of a Post-Delegation mechanism in Version III of its Draft Applicant Guidebook.
In a letter
of November 20, 200931, the WIPO Center reiterated that, in such form, the Post-
Delegation Dispute Resolution Procedure (PDDRP) would be of more limited effect, as it
would not encompass registry conduct in relation to widespread trademark abuse
undertaken by domain name registrants.
The WIPO Center further noted that an
alternative, broader scope of the PDDRP would involve the identification of realistic safe
harbors for registries, who on that basis could responsibly partner with intellectual
property stakeholders toward DNS credibility and integrity.
27.  Following the work of the IRT, ICANN’s Board requested that the GNSO provide input on
whether it would approve the proposed ICANN staff Clearinghouse and Uniform Rapid
Suspension procedure (URS) (the URS adopts the concept but not the design of the
WIPO Center’s ESM proposal), or alternatively whether the GNSO would propose other
equivalent or indeed more effective and implementable RPMs. The GNSO created a
Special Trademarks Issues Review Team (STI) which in its Report32 analyzed and
proposed further adaptations to the URS and the Clearinghouse.
In a letter of
January 26, 201033, the WIPO Center submitted comments on the STI Report noting that
unworkable compromise detracts from the fundamental goal of minimizing rights abuse in
the DNS without excessive need for court intervention.
In specific reply to an ICANN STI
proposal which would impact trademark owners in jurisdictions that do not conduct
“substantive review” of applications, the WIPO Center further cautioned that ICANN
policies should respect trademark law.
28.  On February 15, 2010, ICANN released another round of documents proposing further
adaptations to RPMs including the PDDRP, URS, and Clearinghouse.
29.  Noting ICANN’s proposed limitation of the PDDRP to registry operator “affirmative
conduct”, in a letter of March 26, 201034, the WIPO Center proposed that ICANN
registration authorities give consideration to a mechanism which would address willful
blindness on their part – without involving a sweeping policing duty for such authorities,
who should benefit from realistic safe harbors.
29 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann100509.pdf.
30 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann180609.pdf.
31 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann201109.pdf.
32 http://gnso.icann.org/issues/sti/sti-wt-recommendations-11dec09-en.pdf.
33 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann260110.pdf.
34 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann260310pddrp.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 9
30.  Concerning the URS and Clearinghouse, in separate letters of March 30, 201035, the
WIPO Center submitted comments emphasizing the need for the URS to complement
and interoperate with the existing UDRP so as to offer a time and cost effective additional
enforcement option.
The WIPO Center further cautioned that RPMs should respect
national and international trademark registration and protection norms, in particular with
respect to the Clearinghouse.
(v) Calls for review of the WIPO-initiated UDRP
31.  Separately, on February 12, 2010, an ICANN-convened Registration Abuse Policies
Working Group (RAP WG) produced an Initial Report36 which recommended inter alia,
the initiation of an ICANN Policy Development Process to assess the current state of the
UDRP.  In a letter of March 26, 201037, the WIPO Center submitted comments noting that
the apparently envisaged ICANN committee process risks compromising or destabilizing
the (WIPO-initiated) UDRP, which is universally acknowledged to be an internationally
effective enforcement tool in the interests of all parties.
Any such ICANN process could
increase enforcement burdens on trademark owners and compliance exposure for
registration authorities.
Also, against the backdrop of the ICANN New gTLD Program,
the WIPO Center suggested that rather than seeking to amend the time-tested UDRP, as
actively maintained primarily by the WIPO Center38, attention logically should focus on
the complementary qualities of new mechanisms under consideration.
(vi) Continuing DNS Policy Discussions
32.  Following participation at a meeting of the ICANN Intellectual Property Constituency (IPC)
and at the ICANN Meetings in Nairobi, Kenya, and Brussels, Belgium, the WIPO Center
continues to advocate, as outlined above, balanced RPMs vis-à-vis ICANN’s plans to
allow for a potentially limitless expansion of the DNS.
The WIPO Center has been
contributing to discussions aimed at addressing trademark abuse in the DNS, and
monitors ICANN’s development of decisions that remain outstanding in its New gTLD
Program.  These issues are also subject to monitoring by the ICANN GAC.
B.  Internationalized Domain Names (IDNs)
33.  As noted, another significant policy development in the DNS currently being addressed
by ICANN is the introduction of IDNs (non-Latin script) at the top level.
IDN gTLDs are
being discussed in part in connection with the ICANN New gTLD Program where
potential new gTLD applications are expected to be made for IDNs.
35 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann300310urs.pdf, and http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann300310tmch.pdf.
36 http://www.icann.org/en/announcements/announcement-12feb10-en.htm.
37 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/icann260310rap.pdf.
38 Examples of such stewardship include the provision on a non-profit basis for the benefit of parties globally: Legal
Index of WIPO UDRP Panel Decisions; WIPO Overview of WIPO Panel Views on Selected UDRP Questions;
WIPO Advanced Workshop on Domain Name Dispute Resolution; WIPO Conference: 10 Years UDRP – What's
Next? ; and, WIPO Panelists Meetings.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 10
34.  Separately, ICANN’s Final Implementation Plan for IDN ccTLD Fast Track Process was
published on November 16, 200939.
This has already allowed for the introduction of
several IDN ccTLDs, associated with the two-letter codes in the ISO 3166-1 standard40.
As of June 2010, ICANN has received a total of 21 requests for IDN ccTLD(s)
representing 11 languages.
Approved requests continue to be delegated into the DNS
root zone.
C.  Domain Names and Other Identifiers
35.  In addition to and in connection with the above developments, there are further
developments taking place at ICANN in relation to the protection of non-trademark
identifiers.
36.  It is recalled that the First WIPO Internet Domain Name Process addressed the
relationship between domain names and trademarks.
The Second WIPO Internet
Domain Name Process concerned the relationship between domain names and five other
types of identifiers that had not been addressed, namely, International Nonproprietary
Names for pharmaceutical substances (INNs), the names and acronyms of international
intergovernmental organizations (IGOs), personal names, geographical identifiers,
including country names, and trade names.
37.  At its meeting from September 23 to October 1, 2002, the WIPO General Assembly
recommended amending the UDRP in order to provide protection for country names and
for the names and acronyms of IGOs41.
The WIPO Secretariat transmitted these
recommendations (WIPO-2 Recommendations) to ICANN in February 200342.
38.  Following further WIPO communications, in a letter dated March 13, 200643, the then
President and CEO of ICANN informed the Secretariat that it had not been possible to
achieve a consensus among the various constituencies of ICANN.
Since, by virtue of its
Bylaws, ICANN was dependent on its “bottom-up consensus-seeking procedures” to
introduce new policies or modify existing ones, the then President and CEO of ICANN
expressed doubts as to whether a re-launch of such a consensus-seeking procedure would
result in a basis for moving forward with the WIPO-2 Recommendations as a whole.
The
letter however indicated that progress might be possible with regard to the protection of
names and acronyms of IGOs for which an established basis exists in international law.
39.  In view of the statement made by the President and CEO of ICANN, it then appeared
unlikely that ICANN would move to implement the part of the WIPO-2 Recommendations
that concerns the protection of country names at second level of existing gTLDs.
As to
the WIPO-2 Recommendations on IGO names and acronyms, upon the request of the
GNSO Council, ICANN staff produced on June 15, 2007, an Issues Report on Dispute
Handling for IGO Names and Abbreviations44, recommending as follows:
39 http://www.icann.org/en/topics/idn/fast-track/idn-cctld-implementation-plan-16nov09-en.pdf.
40 http://www.iso.org/iso/english_country_names_and_code_elements.
41 http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/govbody/en/wo_ga_28/wo_ga_28_3.pdf; see also documents SCT/9/8,
paragraphs 6 to 11; and, SCT/9/9, paragraph 149.
42 http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/docs/wipo.doc.
43 A similar letter was sent to the then Chairman of the GAC, Mr. Sharil Tarmizi.
It is posted on ICANN’s web site at:
http://www.icann.org/correspondence/twomey-to-tarmizi-13mar06.pdf.
44 GNSO Issues Report on Dispute Handling for IGO Names and Abbreviations is posted on ICANN’s web site at,
http://gnso.icann.org/issues/igo-names/issues-report-igo-drp-15jun07.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 11
“Staff does not recommend a PDP [Policy Development Process] on the protection of
IGO names and abbreviations at this time.
If staff was recommending a PDP, it would be
within the scope of the GNSO;
“Staff recommends that new gTLD agreements may provide for protection of IGO names
and abbreviations as a contractual condition for new gTLDs;
“Staff recommends that a separate Dispute Resolution Procedure [DRP] be developed for
IGO names and abbreviations as domain names at the second or third level in new
gTLDs and that a framework be developed for handling objections or challenges related
to IGO names and abbreviations in the upcoming application round for new gTLDs.
Staff
believes that this action will be more efficient than launching a PDP at this time;
“Once the DRP has been developed, staff recommends that the GNSO Council consider
launching a PDP to investigate its application to existing gTLDs;
“In the alternative, the GNSO Council may consider forming a Working Group or
assistance group to collaborate on a DRP for IGO names and abbreviations and conduct
a PDP for application of the DRP to existing gTLDs;
“The GNSO Council may also consider extending the work of the Protections of Rights of
Others (PRO) Working Group to develop a DRP for IGO names and abbreviations.”
40.  On June 27, 2007, the GNSO Council requested ICANN staff to provide a report on a
draft IGO Domain Name Dispute Resolution Procedure, primarily foreseen for new
gTLDs.  Such Report was produced by ICANN Staff on September 28, 200745, but to
date has not been adopted by the GNSO Council.
41.  While the WIPO-2 Recommendations were made in the context of the DNS at that time,
i.e., prior to ICANN’s plans for a broad expansion of the DNS, protection of geographical
names and names and acronyms of IGOs is being reconsidered under ICANN’s New gTLD
Program, without ICANN as yet having articulated a formal position in the Draft Applicant
Guidebook.
42.  As to geographical terms, ICANN’s GAC, in particular, has expressed concerns about their
protection in the new gTLDs.
In 2007 it issued the “GAC Principles regarding
New gTLDs46”, which states inter alia:
“2.2 ICANN should avoid [in the introduction of new gTLDs] country, territory or place
names, and country, territory or regional language or people descriptions, unless in
agreement with the relevant governments or public authorities.
[…]
45 http://gnso.icann.org/drafts/gnso-igo-drp-report-v2-28sep07.pdf.
46 http://gac.icann.org/web/home/gTLD_principles.pdf.
SCT/24/4
Annex III, page 12
2.7 Applicant registries for new gTLDs should pledge to:
(a) Adopt, before the new gTLD is introduced, appropriate procedures for blocking, at no
cost and upon demand of governments, public authorities or IGOs, names with national
or geographic significance at the second level of any new gTLD.
(b) Ensure procedures to allow governments, public authorities or IGOs to challenge
abuses of names with national or geographic significance at the second level of any
new gTLD.”
43.  The GAC submitted, upon the ICANN Board’s request, letters dated
April 24, May 26, and August 18, 2009 to ICANN recommending inter alia, specific
measures to protect geographic names in new gTLDs, including reserving names.
Version IV of ICANN’s Draft Applicant Guidebook would require an applicant for a
geographic name-based gTLD string to submit a statement of support for or
non-objection from the relevant governments or public authorities.
The GAC in its Nairobi
Communiqué47 has called for a mechanism to address derivation from conditions of
approval, and also inclusion of commonly used abbreviations or regions not listed in
ISO 3166-2.  These GAC recommendations will be subject to further ICANN GNSO
discussion and ICANN Board approval.
44.  The Secretariat will continue to monitor these developments and provide input where
possible.
The WIPO General Assembly is invited to
take note of the contents of this document.
[End of Annexes and of document]
47 http://nbo.icann.org/meetings/nairobi2010/presentation-gac-soac-reports-12mar10-en.pdf.
